Matthew 1:1	The book of the lineage of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
Matthew 1:2	Abraham conceived Isaac. And Isaac conceived Jacob. And Jacob conceived Judah and his brothers.
Matthew 1:3	And Judah conceived Perez and Zerah by Tamar. And Perez conceived Hezron. And Hezron conceived Ram.
Matthew 1:4	And Ram conceived Amminadab. And Amminadab conceived Nahshon. And Nahshon conceived Salmon.
Matthew 1:5	And Salmon conceived Boaz by Rahab. And Boaz conceived Obed by Ruth. And Obed conceived Jesse.
Matthew 1:6	And Jesse conceived king David. And king David conceived Solomon, by her who had been the wife of Uriah.
Matthew 1:7	And Solomon conceived Rehoboam. And Rehoboam conceived Abijah. And Abijah conceived Asa.
Matthew 1:8	And Asa conceived Jehoshaphat. And Jehoshaphat conceived Joram. And Joram conceived Uzziah.
Matthew 1:9	And Uzziah conceived Jotham. And Jotham conceived Ahaz. And Ahaz conceived Hezekiah.
Matthew 1:10	And Hezekiah conceived Manasseh. And Manasseh conceived Amos. And Amos conceived Josiah.
Matthew 1:11	And Josiah conceived Jechoniah and his brothers in the transmigration of Babylon.
Matthew 1:12	And after the transmigration of Babylon, Jechoniah conceived Shealtiel. And Shealtiel conceived Zerubbabel.
Matthew 1:13	And Zerubbabel conceived Abiud. And Abiud conceived Eliakim. And Eliakim conceived Azor.
Matthew 1:14	And Azor conceived Zadok. And Zadok conceived Achim. And Achim conceived Eliud.
Matthew 1:15	And Eliud conceived Eleazar. And Eleazar conceived Matthan. And Matthan conceived Jacob.
Matthew 1:16	And Jacob conceived Joseph, the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
Matthew 1:17	And so, all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and from David to the transmigration of Babylon, fourteen generations; and from the transmigration of Babylon to the Christ, fourteen generations.
Matthew 1:18	Now the procreation of the Christ occurred in this way. After his mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, before they lived together, she was found to have conceived in her womb by the Holy Spirit.
Matthew 1:19	Then Joseph, her husband, since he was just and was not willing to hand her over, preferred to send her away secretly.
Matthew 1:20	But while thinking over these things, behold, an Angel of the Lord appeared to him in his sleep, saying: “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to accept Mary as your wife. For what has been formed in her is of the Holy Spirit.
Matthew 1:21	And she shall give birth to a son. And you shall call his name JESUS. For he shall accomplish the salvation of his people from their sins.”
Matthew 1:22	Now all this occurred in order to fulfill what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying:
Matthew 1:23	“Behold, a virgin shall conceive in her womb, and she shall give birth to a son. And they shall call his name Emmanuel, which means: God is with us.”
Matthew 1:24	Then Joseph, arising from sleep, did just as the Angel of the Lord had instructed him, and he accepted her as his wife.
Matthew 1:25	And he knew her not, yet she bore her son, the firstborn. And he called his name JESUS.
Matthew 2:1	And so, when Jesus had been born in Bethlehem of Judah, in the days of king Herod, behold, Magi from the east arrived in Jerusalem,
Matthew 2:2	saying: “Where is he who was born king of the Jews? For we have seen his star in the east, and we have come to adore him.”
Matthew 2:3	Now king Herod, hearing this, was disturbed, and all Jerusalem with him.
Matthew 2:4	And gathering together all the leaders of the priests, and the scribes of the people, he consulted with them as to where the Christ would be born.
Matthew 2:5	And they said to him: “In Bethlehem of Judea. For so it has been written by the prophet:
Matthew 2:6	‘And you, Bethlehem, the land of Judah, are by no means least among the leaders of Judah. For from you shall go forth the ruler who shall guide my people Israel.’ ”
Matthew 2:7	Then Herod, quietly calling the Magi, diligently learned from them the time when the star appeared to them.
Matthew 2:8	And sending them into Bethlehem, he said: “Go and diligently ask questions about the boy. And when you have found him, report back to me, so that I, too, may come and adore him.”
Matthew 2:9	And when they had heard the king, they went away. And behold, the star that they had seen in the east went before them, even until, arriving, it stood still above the place where the child was.
Matthew 2:10	Then, seeing the star, they were gladdened by a very great joy.
Matthew 2:11	And entering the home, they found the boy with his mother Mary. And so, falling prostrate, they adored him. And opening their treasures, they offered him gifts: gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
Matthew 2:12	And having received a response in sleep that they should not return to Herod, they went back by another way to their own region.
Matthew 2:13	And after they had gone away, behold, an Angel of the Lord appeared in sleep to Joseph, saying: “Rise up, and take the boy and his mother, and flee into Egypt. And remain there until I tell you. For it will happen that Herod will seek the boy to destroy him.”
Matthew 2:14	And getting up, he took the boy and his mother by night, and withdrew into Egypt.
Matthew 2:15	And he remained there, until the death of Herod, in order to fulfill what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying: “Out of Egypt, I called my son.”
Matthew 2:16	Then Herod, seeing that he had been fooled by the Magi, was very angry. And so he sent to kill all the boys who were in Bethlehem, and in all its borders, from two years of age and under, according to the time that he had learned by questioning the Magi.
Matthew 2:17	Then what was spoken through the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled, saying:
Matthew 2:18	“A voice has been heard in Ramah, great weeping and wailing: Rachel crying for her sons. And she was not willing to be consoled, because they were no more.”
Matthew 2:19	Then, when Herod had passed away, behold, an Angel of the Lord appeared in sleep to Joseph in Egypt,
Matthew 2:20	saying: “Rise up, and take the boy and his mother, and go into the land of Israel. For those who were seeking the life of the boy have passed away.”
Matthew 2:21	And rising up, he took the boy and his mother, and he went into the land of Israel.
Matthew 2:22	Then, hearing that Archelaus reigned in Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. And being warned in sleep, he withdrew into parts of Galilee.
Matthew 2:23	And arriving, he lived in a city which is called Nazareth, in order to fulfill what was spoken through the prophets: “For he shall be called a Nazarene.”
Matthew 3:1	Now in those days, John the Baptist arrived, preaching in the desert of Judea,
Matthew 3:2	and saying: “Repent. For the kingdom of heaven has drawn near.”
Matthew 3:3	For this is the one who was spoken of through the prophet Isaiah, saying: “A voice crying out in the desert: Prepare the way of the Lord. Make straight his paths.”
Matthew 3:4	Now the same John had a garment made from the hair of camels, and a leather belt around his waist. And his food was locusts and wild honey.
Matthew 3:5	Then Jerusalem, and all Judea, and the entire region around the Jordan went out to him.
Matthew 3:6	And they were baptized by him in the Jordan, acknowledging their sins.
Matthew 3:7	Then, seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadducees arriving for his baptism, he said to them: “Progeny of vipers, who warned to you to flee from the approaching wrath?
Matthew 3:8	Therefore, produce fruit worthy of repentance.
Matthew 3:9	And do not choose to say within yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I tell you that God has the power to raise up sons to Abraham from these stones.
Matthew 3:10	For even now the axe has been placed at the root of the trees. Therefore, every tree that does not produce good fruit shall be cut down and cast into the fire.
Matthew 3:11	Indeed, I baptize you with water for repentance, but he who will come after me is more powerful than me. I am not worthy to carry his shoes. He will baptize you with the fire of the Holy Spirit.
Matthew 3:12	His winnowing fan is in his hand. And he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor. And he will gather his wheat into the barn. But the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.”
Matthew 3:13	Then Jesus came from Galilee, to John at the Jordan, in order to be baptized by him.
Matthew 3:14	But John refused him, saying, “I ought to be baptized by you, and yet you come to me?”
Matthew 3:15	And responding, Jesus said to him: “Permit this for now. For in this way it is fitting for us to fulfill all justice.” Then he allowed him.
Matthew 3:16	And Jesus, having been baptized, ascended from the water immediately, and behold, the heavens were opened to him. And he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and alighting on him.
Matthew 3:17	And behold, there was a voice from heaven, saying: “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.”
Matthew 4:1	Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the desert, in order to be tempted by the devil.
Matthew 4:2	And when he had fasted for forty days and forty nights, afterwards he was hungry.
Matthew 4:3	And approaching, the tempter said to him, “If you are the Son of God, tell these stones to become bread.”
Matthew 4:4	And in response he said, “It has been written: ‘Not by bread alone shall man live, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God.’ ”
Matthew 4:5	Then the devil took him up, into the holy city, and set him on the pinnacle of the temple,
Matthew 4:6	and said to him: “If you are the Son of God, cast yourself down. For it has been written: ‘For he has given charge of you to his angels, and they shall take you into their hands, lest perhaps you may hurt your foot against a stone.’ ”
Matthew 4:7	Jesus said to him, “Again, it has been written: ‘You shall not tempt the Lord your God.’ ”
Matthew 4:8	Again, the devil took him up, onto a very high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory,
Matthew 4:9	and said to him, “All these things I will give to you, if you will fall down and adore me.”
Matthew 4:10	Then Jesus said to him: “Go away, Satan. For it has been written: ‘You shall adore the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.’ ”
Matthew 4:11	Then the devil left him. And behold, Angels approached and ministered to him.
Matthew 4:12	And when Jesus had heard that John had been handed over, he withdrew into Galilee.
Matthew 4:13	And leaving behind the city of Nazareth, he went and lived in Capernaum, near the sea, at the borders of Zebulun and of Naphtali,
Matthew 4:14	in order to fulfill what was said through the prophet Isaiah:
Matthew 4:15	“Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, the way of the sea across the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles:
Matthew 4:16	A people who were sitting in darkness have seen a great light. And unto those sitting in the region of the shadow of death, a light has risen.”
Matthew 4:17	From that time, Jesus began to preach, and to say: “Repent. For the kingdom of heaven has drawn near.”
Matthew 4:18	And Jesus, walking near the Sea of Galilee, saw two brothers, Simon who is called Peter, and his brother Andrew, casting a net into the sea (for they were fishermen).
Matthew 4:19	And he said to them: “Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.”
Matthew 4:20	And at once, leaving behind their nets, they followed him.
Matthew 4:21	And continuing on from there, he saw another two brothers, James of Zebedee, and his brother John, in a ship with their father Zebedee, repairing their nets. And he called them.
Matthew 4:22	And immediately, leaving their nets and their father behind, they followed him.
Matthew 4:23	And Jesus traveled throughout all of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every infirmity among the people.
Matthew 4:24	And reports of him went out to all of Syria, and they brought to him all those who had maladies, those who were in the grasp of various sicknesses and torments, and those who were in the hold of demons, and the mentally ill, and paralytics. And he cured them.
Matthew 4:25	And a great crowd followed him from Galilee, and from the Ten Cities, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from across the Jordan.
Matthew 5:1	Then, seeing the crowds, he ascended the mountain, and when he had sat down, his disciples drew near to him,
Matthew 5:2	and opening his mouth, he taught them, saying:
Matthew 5:3	“Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew 5:4	Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the earth.
Matthew 5:5	Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be consoled.
Matthew 5:6	Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for justice, for they shall be satisfied.
Matthew 5:7	Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
Matthew 5:8	Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
Matthew 5:9	Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God.
Matthew 5:10	Blessed are those who endure persecution for the sake of justice, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew 5:11	Blessed are you when they have slandered you, and persecuted you, and spoken all kinds of evil against you, falsely, for my sake:
Matthew 5:12	be glad and exult, for your reward in heaven is plentiful. For so they persecuted the prophets who were before you.
Matthew 5:13	You are the salt of the earth. But if salt loses its saltiness, with what will it be salted? It is no longer useful at all, except to be cast out and trampled under by men.
Matthew 5:14	You are the light of the world. A city set on a mountain cannot be hidden.
Matthew 5:15	And they do not light a lamp and put it under a basket, but on a lampstand, so that it may shine to all who are in the house.
Matthew 5:16	So then, let your light shine in the sight of men, so that they may see your good works, and may glorify your Father, who is in heaven.
Matthew 5:17	Do not think that I have come to loosen the law or the prophets. I have not come to loosen, but to fulfill.
Matthew 5:18	Amen I say to you, certainly, until heaven and earth pass away, not one iota, not one dot shall pass away from the law, until all is done.
Matthew 5:19	Therefore, whoever will have loosened one of the least of these commandments, and have taught men so, shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. But whoever will have done and taught these, such a one shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew 5:20	For I say to you, that unless your justice has surpassed that of the scribes and the Pharisees you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew 5:21	You have heard that it was said to the ancients: ‘You shall not murder; whoever will have murdered shall be liable to judgment.’
Matthew 5:22	But I say to you, that anyone who becomes angry with his brother shall be liable to judgment. But whoever will have called his brother, ‘Idiot,’ shall be liable to the council. Then, whoever will have called him, ‘Worthless,’ shall be liable to the fires of Hell.
Matthew 5:23	Therefore, if you offer your gift at the altar, and there you remember that your brother has something against you,
Matthew 5:24	leave your gift there, before the altar, and go first to be reconciled to your brother, and then you may approach and offer your gift.
Matthew 5:25	Be reconciled with your adversary quickly, while you are still on the way with him, lest perhaps the adversary may hand you over to the judge, and the judge may hand you over to the officer, and you will be thrown in prison.
Matthew 5:26	Amen I say to you, that you shall not go forth from there, until you have repaid the last quarter.
Matthew 5:27	You have heard that it was said to the ancients: ‘You shall not commit adultery.’
Matthew 5:28	But I say to you, that anyone who will have looked at a woman, so as to lust after her, has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
Matthew 5:29	And if your right eye causes you to sin, root it out and cast it away from you. For it is better for you that one of your members perish, than that your whole body be cast into Hell.
Matthew 5:30	And if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and cast it away from you. For it is better for you that one of your members perish, than that your whole body go into Hell.
Matthew 5:31	And it has been said: ‘Whoever would dismiss his wife, let him give her a bill of divorce.’
Matthew 5:32	But I say to you, that anyone who will have dismissed his wife, except in the case of fornication, causes her to commit adultery; and whoever will have married her who has been dismissed commits adultery.
Matthew 5:33	Again, you have heard that it was said to the ancients: ‘You shall not swear falsely. For you shall repay your oaths to the Lord.’
Matthew 5:34	But I say to you, do not swear an oath at all, neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God,
Matthew 5:35	nor by earth, for it is his footstool, nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great king.
Matthew 5:36	Neither shall you swear an oath by your own head, because you are not able to cause one hair to become white or black.
Matthew 5:37	But let your word ‘Yes’ mean ‘Yes,’ and ‘No’ mean ‘No.’ For anything beyond that is of evil.
Matthew 5:38	You have heard that it was said: ‘An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.’
Matthew 5:39	But I say to you, do not resist one who is evil, but if anyone will have struck you on your right cheek, offer to him the other also.
Matthew 5:40	And anyone who wishes to contend with you in judgment, and to take away your tunic, release to him your cloak also.
Matthew 5:41	And whoever will have compelled you for one thousand steps, go with him even for two thousand steps.
Matthew 5:42	Whoever asks of you, give to him. And if anyone would borrow from you, do not turn away from him.
Matthew 5:43	You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall love your neighbor, and you shall have hatred for your enemy.’
Matthew 5:44	But I say to you: Love your enemies. Do good to those who hate you. And pray for those who persecute and slander you.
Matthew 5:45	In this way, you shall be sons of your Father, who is in heaven. He causes his sun to rise upon the good and the bad, and he causes it to rain upon the just and the unjust.
Matthew 5:46	For if you love those who love you, what reward will you have? Do not even tax collectors behave this way?
Matthew 5:47	And if you greet only your brothers, what more have you done? Do not even the pagans behave this way?
Matthew 5:48	Therefore, be perfect, even as your heavenly Father is perfect.”
Matthew 6:1	“Pay attention, lest you perform your justice before men, in order to be seen by them; otherwise you shall not have a reward with your Father, who is in heaven.
Matthew 6:2	Therefore, when you give alms, do not choose to sound a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the towns, so that they may be honored by men. Amen I say to you, they have received their reward.
Matthew 6:3	But when you give alms, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
Matthew 6:4	so that your almsgiving may be in secret, and your Father, who sees in secret, will repay you.
Matthew 6:5	And when you pray, you should not be like the hypocrites, who love standing in the synagogues and at the corners of the streets to pray, so that they may be seen by men. Amen I say to you, they have received their reward.
Matthew 6:6	But you, when you pray, enter into your room, and having shut the door, pray to your Father in secret, and your Father, who sees in secret, will repay you.
Matthew 6:7	And when praying, do not choose many words, as the pagans do. For they think that by their excess of words they might be heeded.
Matthew 6:8	Therefore, do not choose to imitate them. For your Father knows what your needs may be, even before you ask him.
Matthew 6:9	Therefore, you shall pray in this way: Our Father, who is in heaven: May your name be kept holy.
Matthew 6:10	May your kingdom come. May your will be done, as in heaven, so also on earth.
Matthew 6:11	Give us this day our life-sustaining bread.
Matthew 6:12	And forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.
Matthew 6:13	And lead us not into temptation. But free us from evil. Amen.
Matthew 6:14	For if you will forgive men their sins, your heavenly Father also will forgive you your offenses.
Matthew 6:15	But if you will not forgive men, neither will your Father forgive you your sins.
Matthew 6:16	And when you fast, do not choose to become gloomy, like the hypocrites. For they alter their faces, so that their fasting may be apparent to men. Amen I say to you, that they have received their reward.
Matthew 6:17	But as for you, when you fast, anoint your head and wash your face,
Matthew 6:18	so that your fasting will not be apparent to men, but to your Father, who is in secret. And your Father, who sees in secret, will repay you.
Matthew 6:19	Do not choose to store up for yourselves treasures on earth: where rust and moth consume, and where thieves break in and steal.
Matthew 6:20	Instead, store up for yourselves treasures in heaven: where neither rust nor moth consumes, and where thieves do not break in and steal.
Matthew 6:21	For where your treasure is, there also is your heart.
Matthew 6:22	The lamp of your body is your eye. If your eye is wholesome, your entire body will be filled with light.
Matthew 6:23	But if your eye has been corrupted, your entire body will be darkened. If then the light that is in you is darkness, how great will that darkness be!
Matthew 6:24	No one is able to serve two masters. For either he will have hatred for the one, and love the other, or he will persevere with the one, and despise the other. You cannot serve God and wealth.
Matthew 6:25	And so I say to you, do not be anxious about your life, as to what you will eat, nor about your body, as to what you will wear. Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothing?
Matthew 6:26	Consider the birds of the air, how they neither sow, nor reap, nor gather into barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not of much greater value than they are?
Matthew 6:27	And which of you, by thinking, is able to add one cubit to his stature?
Matthew 6:28	And as for clothing, why are you anxious? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they neither work nor weave.
Matthew 6:29	But I say to you, that not even Solomon, in all his glory, was arrayed like one of these.
Matthew 6:30	So if God so clothes the grass of the field, which is here today, and cast into the oven tomorrow, how much more will he care for you, O little in faith?
Matthew 6:31	Therefore, do not choose to be anxious, saying: ‘What shall we eat, and what shall we drink, and with what shall we be clothed?’
Matthew 6:32	For the Gentiles seek all these things. Yet your Father knows that you need all these things.
Matthew 6:33	Therefore, seek first the kingdom of God and his justice, and all these things shall be added to you as well.
Matthew 6:34	Therefore, do not be anxious about tomorrow; for the future day will be anxious for itself. Sufficient for the day is its evil.”
Matthew 7:1	“Do not judge, so that you may not be judged.
Matthew 7:2	For with whatever judgment you judge, so shall you be judged; and with whatever measure you measure out, so shall it be measured back to you.
Matthew 7:3	And how can you see the splinter in your brother’s eye, and not see the board in your own eye?
Matthew 7:4	Or how can you say to your brother, ‘Let me take the splinter from your eye,’ while, behold, a board is in your own eye?
Matthew 7:5	Hypocrite, first remove the board from your own eye, and then you will see clearly enough to remove the splinter from your brother’s eye.
Matthew 7:6	Do not give what is holy to dogs, and do not cast your pearls before swine, lest perhaps they may trample them under their feet, and then, turning, they may tear you apart.
Matthew 7:7	Ask, and it shall be given to you. Seek, and you shall find. Knock, and it shall be opened to you.
Matthew 7:8	For everyone who asks, receives; and whoever seeks, finds; and to anyone who knocks, it will be opened.
Matthew 7:9	Or what man is there among you, who, if his son were to ask him for bread, would offer him a stone;
Matthew 7:10	or if he were to ask him for a fish, would offer him a snake?
Matthew 7:11	Therefore, if you, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your sons, how much more will your Father, who is in heaven, give good things to those who ask him?
Matthew 7:12	Therefore, all things whatsoever that you wish that men would do to you, do so also to them. For this is the law and the prophets.
Matthew 7:13	Enter through the narrow gate. For wide is the gate, and broad is the way, which leads to perdition, and many there are who enter through it.
Matthew 7:14	How narrow is the gate, and how straight is the way, which leads to life, and few there are who find it!
Matthew 7:15	Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly are ravenous wolves.
Matthew 7:16	You shall know them by their fruits. Can grapes be gathered from thorns, or figs from thistles?
Matthew 7:17	So then, every good tree produces good fruit, and the evil tree produces evil fruit.
Matthew 7:18	A good tree is not able to produce evil fruit, and an evil tree is not able to produce good fruit.
Matthew 7:19	Every tree which does not produce good fruit shall be cut down and cast into the fire.
Matthew 7:20	Therefore, by their fruits you will know them.
Matthew 7:21	Not all who say to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the kingdom of heaven. But whoever does the will of my Father, who is in heaven, the same shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew 7:22	Many will say to me in that day, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name, and cast out demons in your name, and perform many powerful deeds in your name?’
Matthew 7:23	And then will I disclose to them: ‘I have never known you. Depart from me, you workers of iniquity.’
Matthew 7:24	Therefore, everyone who hears these words of mine and does them shall be compared to a wise man, who built his house upon the rock.
Matthew 7:25	And the rains descended, and the floods rose up, and the winds blew, and rushed upon that house, but it did not fall, for it was founded on the rock.
Matthew 7:26	And everyone who hears these words of mine and does not do them shall be like a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand.
Matthew 7:27	And the rains descended, and the floods rose up, and the winds blew, and rushed upon that house, and it did fall, and great was its ruin.”
Matthew 7:28	And it happened, when Jesus had completed these words, that the crowds were astonished at his doctrine.
Matthew 7:29	For he was teaching them as one who has authority, and not like their scribes and Pharisees.
Matthew 8:1	And when he had descended from the mountain, great crowds followed him.
Matthew 8:2	And behold, a leper, drawing near, adored him, saying, “Lord, if you are willing, you are able to cleanse me.”
Matthew 8:3	And Jesus, extending his hand, touched him, saying: “I am willing. Be cleansed.” And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
Matthew 8:4	And Jesus said to him: “See to it that you tell no one. But go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses instructed, as a testimony for them.”
Matthew 8:5	And when he had entered into Capernaum, a centurion approached, petitioning him,
Matthew 8:6	and saying, “Lord, my servant lies at home paralyzed and badly tormented.”
Matthew 8:7	And Jesus said to him, “I will come and heal him.”
Matthew 8:8	And responding, the centurion said: “Lord, I am not worthy that you should enter under my roof, but only say the word, and my servant shall be healed.
Matthew 8:9	For I, too, am a man placed under authority, having soldiers under me. And I say to one, ‘Go,’ and he goes, and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes, and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
Matthew 8:10	And, hearing this, Jesus wondered. And he said to those following him: “Amen I say to you, I have not found so great a faith in Israel.
Matthew 8:11	For I say to you, that many shall come from the east and the west, and they shall sit at table with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew 8:12	But the sons of the kingdom shall be cast into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
Matthew 8:13	And Jesus said to the centurion, “Go, and just as you have believed, so let it be done for you.” And the servant was healed at that very hour.
Matthew 8:14	And when Jesus had arrived at the house of Peter, he saw his mother-in-law lying ill with a fever.
Matthew 8:15	And he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she rose up and ministered to them.
Matthew 8:16	And when evening arrived, they brought to him many who had demons, and he cast out the spirits with a word. And he healed all those having maladies,
Matthew 8:17	in order to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah, saying, “He took our infirmities, and he carried away our diseases.”
Matthew 8:18	Then Jesus, seeing the great crowds encircling him, gave orders to go across the sea.
Matthew 8:19	And one scribe, approaching, said to him, “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you will go.”
Matthew 8:20	And Jesus said to him, “Foxes have dens, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has nowhere to rest his head.”
Matthew 8:21	Then another of his disciples said to him, “Lord, permit me first to go and bury my father.”
Matthew 8:22	But Jesus said to him, “Follow me, and allow the dead to bury their dead.”
Matthew 8:23	And climbing into a boat, his disciples followed him.
Matthew 8:24	And behold, a great tempest occurred in the sea, so much so that the boat was covered with waves; yet truly, he was sleeping.
Matthew 8:25	And his disciples drew near to him, and they awakened him, saying: “Lord, save us, we are perishing.”
Matthew 8:26	And Jesus said to them, “Why are you afraid, O little in faith?” Then rising up, he commanded the winds, and the sea. And a great tranquility occurred.
Matthew 8:27	Moreover, the men wondered, saying: “What kind of man is this? For even the winds and the sea obey him.”
Matthew 8:28	And when he had arrived across the sea, into the region of the Gerasenes, he was met by two who had demons, who were so exceedingly savage, as they went out from among the tombs, that no one was able to cross by that way.
Matthew 8:29	And behold, they cried out, saying: “What are we to you, O Jesus, the Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before the time?”
Matthew 8:30	Now there was, not far from them, a herd of many swine feeding.
Matthew 8:31	Then the demons petitioned him, saying: “If you cast us from here, send us into the herd of swine.”
Matthew 8:32	And he said to them, “Go.” And they, going out, went into the swine. And behold, the entire herd suddenly rushed along a steep place into the sea. And they died in the waters.
Matthew 8:33	Then the shepherds fled, and arriving in the city, they reported on all this, and on those who had had the demons.
Matthew 8:34	And behold, the entire city went out to meet Jesus. And having seen him, they petitioned him, so that he would cross from their borders.
Matthew 9:1	And climbing into a boat, he crossed the sea, and he arrived at his own city.
Matthew 9:2	And behold, they brought to him a paralytic, lying on a bed. And Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralytic, “Be strengthened in faith, son; your sins are forgiven you.”
Matthew 9:3	And behold, some of the scribes said within themselves, “He is blaspheming.”
Matthew 9:4	And when Jesus had perceived their thoughts, he said: “Why do you think such evil in your hearts?
Matthew 9:5	Which is easier to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven you,’ or to say, ‘Rise up and walk?’
Matthew 9:6	But, so that you may know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins,” he then said to the paralytic, “Rise up, take up your bed, and go into your house.”
Matthew 9:7	And he arose and went into his house.
Matthew 9:8	Then the crowd, seeing this, was frightened, and they glorified God, who gave such power to men.
Matthew 9:9	And when Jesus passed on from there, he saw, sitting at the tax office, a man named Matthew. And he said to him, “Follow me.” And rising up, he followed him.
Matthew 9:10	And it happened that, as he was sitting down to eat in the house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners arrived, and they sat down to eat with Jesus and his disciples.
Matthew 9:11	And the Pharisees, seeing this, said to his disciples, “Why does your Teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
Matthew 9:12	But Jesus, hearing this, said: “It is not those who are healthy who are in need of a physician, but those who have maladies.
Matthew 9:13	So then, go out and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy and not sacrifice.’ For I have not come to call the just, but sinners.”
Matthew 9:14	Then the disciples of John drew near to him, saying, “Why do we and the Pharisees fast frequently, but your disciples do not fast?”
Matthew 9:15	And Jesus said to them: “How can the sons of the groom mourn, while the groom is still with them? But the days will arrive when the groom will be taken away from them. And then they shall fast.
Matthew 9:16	For no one would sew a patch of new cloth onto an old garment. For it pulls its fullness away from the garment, and the tear is made worse.
Matthew 9:17	Neither do they pour new wine into old wineskins. Otherwise, the wineskins rupture, and the wine pours out, and the wineskins are destroyed. Instead, they pour new wine into new wineskins. And so, both are preserved.”
Matthew 9:18	As he was speaking these things to them, behold, a certain ruler approached and adored him, saying: “Lord, my daughter has recently passed away. But come and impose your hand upon her, and she will live.”
Matthew 9:19	And Jesus, rising up, followed him, with his disciples.
Matthew 9:20	And behold, a woman, who had suffered from a flow of blood for twelve years, approached from behind and touched the hem of his garment.
Matthew 9:21	For she said within herself, “If I will touch even his garment, I shall be saved.”
Matthew 9:22	But Jesus, turning and seeing her, said: “Be strengthened in faith, daughter; your faith has made you well.” And the woman was made well from that hour.
Matthew 9:23	And when Jesus had arrived in the house of the ruler, and he had seen the musicians and the tumultuous crowd,
Matthew 9:24	he said, “Depart. For the girl is not dead, but asleep.” And they derided him.
Matthew 9:25	And when the crowd had been sent away, he entered. And he took her by the hand. And the girl rose up.
Matthew 9:26	And the news of this went out to that entire land.
Matthew 9:27	And as Jesus passed from there, two blind men followed him, crying out and saying, “Take pity on us, Son of David.”
Matthew 9:28	And when he had arrived at the house, the blind men approached him. And Jesus said to them, “Do you trust that I am able to do this for you?” They say to him, “Certainly, Lord.”
Matthew 9:29	Then he touched their eyes, saying, “According to your faith, so let it be done for you.”
Matthew 9:30	And their eyes were opened. And Jesus warned them, saying, “See to it that no one knows of this.”
Matthew 9:31	But going out, they spread the news of it to all that land.
Matthew 9:32	Then, when they had departed, behold, they brought him a man who was mute, having a demon.
Matthew 9:33	And after the demon was cast out, the mute man spoke. And the crowds wondered, saying, “Never has anything like this been seen in Israel.”
Matthew 9:34	But the Pharisees said, “By the prince of demons does he cast out demons.”
Matthew 9:35	And Jesus traveled throughout all of the cities and towns, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing every illness and every infirmity.
Matthew 9:36	Then, seeing the multitudes, he had compassion on them, because they were distressed and were reclining, like sheep without a shepherd.
Matthew 9:37	Then he said to his disciples: “The harvest indeed is great, but the laborers are few.
Matthew 9:38	Therefore, petition the Lord of the harvest, so that he may sent out laborers to his harvest.”
Matthew 10:1	And having called together his twelve disciples, he gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out and to cure every sickness and every infirmity.
Matthew 10:2	Now the names of the twelve Apostles are these: the First, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother,
Matthew 10:3	James of Zebedee, and John his brother, Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the tax collector, and James of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus,
Matthew 10:4	Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.
Matthew 10:5	Jesus sent these twelve, instructing them, saying: “Do not travel by the way of the Gentiles, and do not enter into the city of the Samaritans,
Matthew 10:6	but instead go to the sheep who have fallen away from the house of Israel.
Matthew 10:7	And going forth, preach, saying: ‘For the kingdom of heaven has drawn near.’
Matthew 10:8	Cure the infirm, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, cast out demons. You have received freely, so give freely.
Matthew 10:9	Do not choose to possess gold, nor silver, nor money in your belts,
Matthew 10:10	nor provisions for the journey, nor two tunics, nor shoes, nor a staff. For the laborer deserves his portion.
Matthew 10:11	Now, into whatever city or town you will enter, inquire as to who is worthy within it. And stay there until you depart.
Matthew 10:12	Then, when you enter into the house, greet it, saying, ‘Peace to this house.’
Matthew 10:13	And if, indeed, that house is worthy, your peace will rest upon it. But if it is not worthy, your peace will return to you.
Matthew 10:14	And whoever has neither received you, nor listened to your words, departing from that house or city, shake off the dust from your feet.
Matthew 10:15	Amen I say to you, it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.
Matthew 10:16	Behold, I am sending you like sheep in the midst of wolves. Therefore, be as prudent as serpents and as simple as doves.
Matthew 10:17	But beware of men. For they will hand you over to councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues.
Matthew 10:18	And you shall be led before both rulers and kings for my sake, as a testimony to them and to the Gentiles.
Matthew 10:19	But when they hand you over, do not choose to think about how or what to speak. For what to speak shall be given to you in that hour.
Matthew 10:20	For it is not you who will be speaking, but the Spirit of your Father, who will speak in you.
Matthew 10:21	And brother will hand over brother to death, and father will hand over son. And children will rise up against parents and bring about their deaths.
Matthew 10:22	And you will be hated by all for the sake of my name. But whoever will have persevered, even to the end, the same shall be saved.
Matthew 10:23	Now when they persecute you in one city, flee into another. Amen I say to you, you will not have exhausted all the cities of Israel, before the Son of man returns.
Matthew 10:24	The disciple is not above the teacher, nor is the servant above his master.
Matthew 10:25	It is sufficient for the disciple that he be like his teacher, and the servant, like his master. If they have called the Father of the family, ‘Beelzebub,’ how much more those of his household?
Matthew 10:26	Therefore, do not fear them. For nothing is covered that shall not be revealed, nor hidden that shall not be known.
Matthew 10:27	What I tell you in darkness, speak in the light. And what you hear whispered in the ear, preach above the rooftops.
Matthew 10:28	And do not be afraid of those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. But instead fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell.
Matthew 10:29	Are not two sparrows sold for one small coin? And yet not one of them will fall to the ground without your Father.
Matthew 10:30	For even the hairs of your head have all been numbered.
Matthew 10:31	Therefore, do not be afraid. You are worth more than many sparrows.
Matthew 10:32	Therefore, everyone who acknowledges me before men, I also will acknowledge before my Father, who is in heaven.
Matthew 10:33	But whoever will have denied me before men, I also will deny before my Father, who is in heaven.
Matthew 10:34	Do not think that I came to send peace upon the earth. I came, not to send peace, but the sword.
Matthew 10:35	For I came to divide a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
Matthew 10:36	And the enemies of a man will be those of his own household.
Matthew 10:37	Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me. And whoever loves son or daughter above me is not worthy of me.
Matthew 10:38	And whoever does not take up his cross, and follow me is not worthy of me.
Matthew 10:39	Whoever finds his life, will lose it. And whoever will have lost his life because of me, shall find it.
Matthew 10:40	Whoever receives you, receives me. And whoever receives me, receives him who sent me.
Matthew 10:41	Whoever receives a prophet, in the name of a prophet, shall receive the reward of a prophet. And whoever receives the just in the name of the just shall receive the reward of the just.
Matthew 10:42	And whoever shall give, even to one of the least of these, a cup of cold water to drink, solely in the name of a disciple: Amen I say to you, he shall not lose his reward.”
Matthew 11:1	And it happened that, when Jesus had completed instructing his twelve disciples, he went away from there in order to teach and to preach in their cities.
Matthew 11:2	Now when John had heard, in prison, about the works of Christ, sending two of his disciples, he said to him,
Matthew 11:3	“Are you he who is to come, or should we expect another?”
Matthew 11:4	And Jesus, responding, said to them: “Go and report to John what you have heard and seen.
Matthew 11:5	The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise again, the poor are evangelized.
Matthew 11:6	And blessed is he who has found no offense in me.”
Matthew 11:7	Then, after they departed, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out to the desert to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
Matthew 11:8	So what did you go out to see? A man in soft garments? Behold, those who are clothed in soft garments are in the houses of kings.
Matthew 11:9	Then what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
Matthew 11:10	For this is he, of whom it is written: ‘Behold, I send my Angel before your face, who shall prepare your way before you.’
Matthew 11:11	Amen I say to you, among those born of women, there has arisen no one greater than John the Baptist. Yet the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
Matthew 11:12	But from the days of John the Baptist, even until now, the kingdom of heaven has endured violence, and the violent carry it away.
Matthew 11:13	For all the prophets and the law prophesied, even until John.
Matthew 11:14	And if you are willing to accept it, he is the Elijah, who is to come.
Matthew 11:15	Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear.
Matthew 11:16	But to what shall I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplace,
Matthew 11:17	who, calling out to their companions, say: ‘We played music for you, and you did not dance. We lamented, and you did not mourn.’
Matthew 11:18	For John came neither eating nor drinking; and they say, ‘He has a demon.’
Matthew 11:19	The Son of man came eating and drinking; and they say, ‘Behold, a man who eats voraciously and who drinks wine, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.’ But wisdom is justified by her sons.”
Matthew 11:20	Then he began to rebuke the cities in which many of his miracles were accomplished, for they still had not repented.
Matthew 11:21	“Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles that were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in haircloth and ashes.
Matthew 11:22	Yet truly, I say to you, Tyre and Sidon shall be forgiven more than you, on the day of judgment.
Matthew 11:23	And you, Capernaum, would you be exalted all the way to heaven? You shall descend all the way to Hell. For if the miracles that were done in you had been done in Sodom, perhaps it would have remained, even to this day.
Matthew 11:24	Yet truly, I say to you, that the land of Sodom shall be forgiven more than you, on the day of judgment.”
Matthew 11:25	At that time, Jesus responded and said: “I acknowledge you, Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and the prudent, and have revealed them to little ones.
Matthew 11:26	Yes, Father, for this was pleasing before you.
Matthew 11:27	All things have been delivered to me by my Father. And no one knows the Son except the Father, nor does anyone know the Father except the Son, and those to whom the Son is willing to reveal him.
Matthew 11:28	Come to me, all you who labor and have been burdened, and I will refresh you.
Matthew 11:29	Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me, for I am meek and humble of heart; and you shall find rest for your souls.
Matthew 11:30	For my yoke is sweet and my burden is light.”
Matthew 12:1	At that time, Jesus went out through the ripe grain on the Sabbath. And his disciples, being hungry, began to separate the grain and to eat.
Matthew 12:2	Then the Pharisees, seeing this, said to him, “Behold, your disciples are doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbaths.”
Matthew 12:3	But he said to them: “Have you not read what David did, when he was hungry, and those who were with him:
Matthew 12:4	how he entered the house of God and ate the bread of the Presence, which was not lawful for him to eat, nor for those who were with him, but only for the priests?
Matthew 12:5	Or have you not read in the law, that on the Sabbaths the priests in the temple violate the Sabbath, and they are without guilt?
Matthew 12:6	But I say to you, that something greater than the temple is here.
Matthew 12:7	And if you knew what this means, ‘I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,’ you would never have condemned the innocent.
Matthew 12:8	For the Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath.”
Matthew 12:9	And when he had passed from there, he went into their synagogues.
Matthew 12:10	And behold, there was a man who had a withered hand, and they questioned him, so that they might accuse him, saying, “Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbaths?”
Matthew 12:11	But he said to them: “Who is there among you, having even one sheep, if it will have fallen into a pit on the Sabbath, would not take hold of it and lift it up?
Matthew 12:12	How much better is a man than a sheep? And so, it is lawful to do good on the Sabbaths.”
Matthew 12:13	Then he said to the man, “Extend your hand.” And he extended it, and it was restored to health, just like the other one.
Matthew 12:14	Then the Pharisees, departing, took council against him, as to how they might destroy him.
Matthew 12:15	But Jesus, knowing this, withdrew from there. And many followed him, and he cured them all.
Matthew 12:16	And he instructed them, lest they make him known.
Matthew 12:17	Then what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah was fulfilled, saying:
Matthew 12:18	“Behold, my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased. I will place my Spirit over him, and he shall announce judgment to the nations.
Matthew 12:19	He shall not contend, nor cry out, neither shall anyone hear his voice in the streets.
Matthew 12:20	He shall not crush the bruised reed, and he shall not extinguish the smoking wick, until he sends forth judgment unto victory.
Matthew 12:21	And the Gentiles shall hope in his name.”
Matthew 12:22	Then one who had a demon, who was blind and mute, was brought to him. And he cured him, so that he spoke and saw.
Matthew 12:23	And all the crowds were stupefied, and they said, “Could this be the son of David?”
Matthew 12:24	But the Pharisees, hearing it, said, “This man does not cast out demons, except by Beelzebub, the prince of the demons.”
Matthew 12:25	But Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said to them: “Every kingdom divided against itself will become desolate. And every city or house divided against itself will not stand.
Matthew 12:26	So if Satan casts out Satan, then he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?
Matthew 12:27	And if I cast out demons by Beelzebub, by whom do your own sons cast them out? Therefore, they shall be your judges.
Matthew 12:28	But if I cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has arrived among you.
Matthew 12:29	Or how can anyone enter into the house of a strong man, and plunder his belongings, unless he first restrains the strong man? And then he will plunder his house.
Matthew 12:30	Whoever is not with me, is against me. And whoever does not gather with me, scatters.
Matthew 12:31	For this reason, I say to you: Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven men, but blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be forgiven.
Matthew 12:32	And anyone who will have spoken a word against the Son of man shall be forgiven. But whoever will have spoken against the Holy Spirit shall not be forgiven, neither in this age, nor in the future age.
Matthew 12:33	Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree evil and its fruit evil. For certainly a tree is known by its fruit.
Matthew 12:34	Progeny of vipers, how are you able to speak good things while you are evil? For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.
Matthew 12:35	A good man offers good things from a good storehouse. And an evil man offers evil things from an evil storehouse.
Matthew 12:36	But I say to you, that for every idle word which men will have spoken, they shall render an account in the day of judgment.
Matthew 12:37	For by your words shall you be justified, and by your words shall you be condemned.”
Matthew 12:38	Then certain ones from the scribes and the Pharisees responded to him, saying, “Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.”
Matthew 12:39	And answering, he said to them: “An evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign. But a sign will not be given to it, except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
Matthew 12:40	For just as Jonah was in the belly of the whale for three days and three nights, so shall the Son of man be in the heart of the earth for three days and three nights.
Matthew 12:41	The men of Nineveh shall arise in judgment with this generation, and they shall condemn it. For, at the preaching of Jonah, they repented. And behold, there is a greater than Jonah here.
Matthew 12:42	The Queen of the South shall arise in judgment with this generation, and she shall condemn it. For she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon. And behold, there is a greater than Solomon here.
Matthew 12:43	Now when an unclean spirit departs from a man, he walks through dry places, seeking rest, and he does not find it.
Matthew 12:44	Then he says, ‘I will return to my house, from which I departed’. And arriving, he finds it vacant, swept clean, and decorated.
Matthew 12:45	Then he goes and takes with him seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and live there. And in the end, the man becomes worse than he was at first. So, too, shall it be with this most wicked generation.”
Matthew 12:46	While he was still speaking to the crowds, behold, his mother and his brothers were standing outside, seeking to speak with him.
Matthew 12:47	And someone said to him: “Behold, your mother and your brothers are standing outside, seeking you.”
Matthew 12:48	But responding to the one speaking to him, he said, “Which one is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
Matthew 12:49	And extending his hand to his disciples, he said: “Behold: my mother and my brothers.
Matthew 12:50	For anyone who does the will of my Father, who is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.”
Matthew 13:1	In that day, Jesus, departing from the house, sat down beside the sea.
Matthew 13:2	And such great crowds were gathered to him that he climbed into a boat and he sat down. And the entire multitude stood on the shore.
Matthew 13:3	And he spoke many things to them in parables, saying: “Behold, a sower went out to sow seed.
Matthew 13:4	And while he was sowing, some fell beside the road, and the birds of the air came and ate it.
Matthew 13:5	Then others fell in a rocky place, where they did not have much soil. And they sprung up promptly, because they had no depth of soil.
Matthew 13:6	But when the sun rose up, they were scorched, and because they had no roots, they withered.
Matthew 13:7	Still others fell among thorns, and the thorns increased and suffocated them.
Matthew 13:8	Yet some others fell upon good soil, and they produced fruit: some one hundred fold, some sixty fold, some thirty fold.
Matthew 13:9	Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Matthew 13:10	And his disciples drew near to him and said, “Why do you speak to them in parables?”
Matthew 13:11	Responding, he said to them: “Because it has been given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but it has not been given to them.
Matthew 13:12	For whoever has, it shall be given to him, and he shall have in abundance. But whoever has not, even what he has shall be taken away from him.
Matthew 13:13	For this reason, I speak to them in parables: because seeing, they do not see, and hearing they do not hear, nor do they understand.
Matthew 13:14	And so, in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, who said, ‘Hearing, you shall hear, but not understand; and seeing, you shall see, but not perceive.
Matthew 13:15	For the heart of this people has grown fat, and with their ears they hear heavily, and they have closed their eyes, lest at any time they might see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and be converted, and then I would heal them.’
Matthew 13:16	But blessed are your eyes, because they see, and your ears, because they hear.
Matthew 13:17	Amen I say to you, certainly, that many of the prophets and the just desired to see what you see, and yet they did not see it, and to hear what you hear, and yet they did not hear it.
Matthew 13:18	Listen, then, to the parable of the sower.
Matthew 13:19	With anyone who hears the word of the kingdom and does not understand it, evil comes and carries away what was sown in his heart. This is he who received the seed by the side of the road.
Matthew 13:20	Then whoever has received the seed upon a rocky place, this is one who hears the word and promptly accepts it with joy.
Matthew 13:21	But he has no root in himself, so it is only for a time; then, when tribulation and persecution occur because of the word, he promptly stumbles.
Matthew 13:22	And whoever has received the seed among thorns, this is he who hears the word, but the cares of this age and the falseness of riches suffocate the word, and he is effectively without fruit.
Matthew 13:23	Yet truly, whoever has received the seed into good soil, this is he who hears the word, and understands it, and so he bears fruit, and he produces: some a hundred fold, and another sixty fold, and another thirty fold.”
Matthew 13:24	He proposed another parable to them, saying: “The kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field.
Matthew 13:25	But while the men were sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds amid the wheat, and then went away.
Matthew 13:26	And when the plants had grown, and had produced fruit, then the weeds also appeared.
Matthew 13:27	So the servants of the Father of the family, approaching, said to him: ‘Lord, did you not sow good seed in your field? Then how is it that it has weeds?’
Matthew 13:28	And he said to them, ‘A man who is an enemy has done this.’ So the servants said to him, ‘Is it your will that we should go and gather them up?’
Matthew 13:29	And he said: ‘No, lest perhaps in gathering the weeds, you might also root out the wheat together with it.
Matthew 13:30	Permit both to grow until the harvest, and at the time of the harvest, I will say to the reapers: Gather first the weeds, and bind them into bundles to burn, but the wheat gather into my storehouse.’ ”
Matthew 13:31	He proposed another parable to them, saying: “The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed in his field.
Matthew 13:32	It is, indeed, the least of all seeds, but when it has grown, it is greater than all the plants, and it becomes a tree, so much so that the birds of the air come and dwell in its branches.”
Matthew 13:33	He spoke another parable to them: “The kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of fine wheat flour, until it was entirely leavened.”
Matthew 13:34	All these things Jesus spoke in parables to the crowds. And he did not speak to them apart from parables,
Matthew 13:35	in order to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet, saying: “I will open my mouth in parables. I will proclaim what has been hidden since the foundation of the world.”
Matthew 13:36	Then, dismissing the crowds, he went into the house. And his disciples drew near to him, saying, “Explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field.”
Matthew 13:37	Responding, he said to them: “He who sows the good seed is the Son of man.
Matthew 13:38	Now the field is the world. And the good seeds are the sons of the kingdom. But the weeds are the sons of wickedness.
Matthew 13:39	So the enemy who sowed them is the devil. And truly, the harvest is the consummation of the age; while the reapers are the Angels.
Matthew 13:40	Therefore, just as weeds are gathered up and burned with fire, so shall it be at the consummation of the age.
Matthew 13:41	The Son of man shall send out his Angels, and they shall gather from his kingdom all who lead astray and those who work iniquity.
Matthew 13:42	And he shall cast them into the furnace of fire, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Matthew 13:43	Then the just ones shall shine like the sun, in the kingdom of their Father. Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear.
Matthew 13:44	The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hidden in a field. When a man finds it, he hides it, and, because of his joy, he goes and sells everything that he has, and he buys that field.
Matthew 13:45	Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant seeking good pearls.
Matthew 13:46	Having found one pearl of great value, he went away and sold all that he had, and he bought it.
Matthew 13:47	Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net cast into the sea, which gathers together all kinds of fish.
Matthew 13:48	When it has been filled, drawing it out and sitting beside the shore, they selected the good into vessels, but the bad they threw away.
Matthew 13:49	So shall it be at the consummation of the age. The Angels shall go forth and separate the bad from the midst of the just.
Matthew 13:50	And they shall cast them into the furnace of fire, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Matthew 13:51	Have you understood all these things?” They say to him, “Yes.”
Matthew 13:52	He said to them, “Therefore, every scribe well-taught about the kingdom of heaven, is like a man, the father of a family, who offers from his storehouse both the new and the old.”
Matthew 13:53	And it happened that, when Jesus had completed these parables, he went away from there.
Matthew 13:54	And arriving in his own country, he taught them in their synagogues, so much so that they wondered and said: “How can such wisdom and power be with this one?
Matthew 13:55	Is this not the son of a workman? Is not his mother called Mary, and his brothers, James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Jude?
Matthew 13:56	And his sisters, are they not all with us? Therefore, from where has this one obtained all these things?”
Matthew 13:57	And they took offense at him. But Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country and in his own house.”
Matthew 13:58	And he did not work many miracles there, because of their unbelief.
Matthew 14:1	In that time, Herod the Tetrarch heard the news about Jesus.
Matthew 14:2	And he said to his servants: “This is John the Baptist. He has risen from the dead, and that is why miracles are at work in him.”
Matthew 14:3	For Herod had apprehended John, and bound him, and put him in prison, because of Herodias, the wife of his brother.
Matthew 14:4	For John was telling him, “It is not lawful for you to have her.”
Matthew 14:5	And though he wanted to kill him, he feared the people, because they held him to be a prophet.
Matthew 14:6	Then, on Herod’s birthday, the daughter of Herodias danced in their midst, and it pleased Herod.
Matthew 14:7	And so he promised with an oath to give her whatever she would ask of him.
Matthew 14:8	But, having been advised by her mother, she said, “Give me here, on a platter, the head of John the Baptist.”
Matthew 14:9	And the king was greatly saddened. But because of his oath, and because of those who sat at table with him, he ordered it to be given.
Matthew 14:10	And he sent and beheaded John in prison.
Matthew 14:11	And his head was brought on a platter, and it was given to the girl, and she brought it to her mother.
Matthew 14:12	And his disciples approached and took the body, and they buried it. And arriving, they reported it to Jesus.
Matthew 14:13	When Jesus had heard it, he withdrew from there by boat, to a deserted place by himself. And when the crowds had heard of it, they followed him on foot from the cities.
Matthew 14:14	And going out, he saw a great multitude, and he took pity on them, and he cured their sick.
Matthew 14:15	And when evening had arrived, his disciples approached him, saying: “This is a deserted place, and the hour has now passed. Dismiss the crowds, so that, by going into the towns, they may buy food for themselves.”
Matthew 14:16	But Jesus said to them: “They have no need to go. Give them something to eat yourselves.”
Matthew 14:17	They answered him, “We have nothing here, except five loaves and two fish.”
Matthew 14:18	He said to them, “Bring them here to me.”
Matthew 14:19	And when he had ordered the multitude to sit down upon the grass, he took the five loaves and the two fish, and gazing up to heaven, he blessed and broke and gave the bread to the disciples, and then the disciples to the multitudes.
Matthew 14:20	And they all ate and were satisfied. And they took up the remnants: twelve baskets full of fragments.
Matthew 14:21	Now the number of those who ate was five thousand men, besides women and children.
Matthew 14:22	And Jesus promptly compelled his disciples to climb into the boat, and to precede him in crossing the sea, while he dismissed the crowds.
Matthew 14:23	And having dismissed the multitude, he ascended alone onto a mountain to pray. And when evening arrived, he was alone there.
Matthew 14:24	But in the midst of the sea, the boat was being tossed about by the waves. For the wind was against them.
Matthew 14:25	Then, in the fourth watch of the night, he came to them, walking upon the sea.
Matthew 14:26	And seeing him walking upon the sea, they were disturbed, saying: “It must be an apparition.” And they cried out, because of fear.
Matthew 14:27	And immediately, Jesus spoke to them, saying: “Have faith. It is I. Do not be afraid.”
Matthew 14:28	Then Peter responded by saying, “Lord, if it is you, order me come to you over the waters.”
Matthew 14:29	And he said, “Come.” And Peter, descending from the boat, walked over the water, so as to go to Jesus.
Matthew 14:30	Yet truly, seeing that the wind was strong, he was afraid. And as he began to sink, he cried out, saying: “Lord, save me.”
Matthew 14:31	And immediately Jesus extended his hand and took hold of him. And he said to him, “O little in faith, why did you doubt?”
Matthew 14:32	And when they had ascended into the boat, the wind ceased.
Matthew 14:33	Then those who were in the boat drew near and adored him, saying: “Truly, you are the Son of God.”
Matthew 14:34	And having crossed the sea, they arrived in the land of Genesaret.
Matthew 14:35	And when the men of that place had recognized him, they sent into all that region, and they brought to him all who had maladies.
Matthew 14:36	And they petitioned him, so that they might touch even the hem of his garment. And as many as touched it were made whole.
Matthew 15:1	Then the scribes and the Pharisees came to him from Jerusalem, saying:
Matthew 15:2	“Why do your disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? For they do not wash their hands when they eat bread.”
Matthew 15:3	But responding, he said to them: “And why do you transgress the commandment of God for the sake of your tradition? For God said:
Matthew 15:4	‘Honor your father and mother,’ and, ‘Whoever will have cursed father or mother shall die a death.’
Matthew 15:5	But you say: ‘If anyone will have said to father or mother, “It is dedicated, so that whatever is from me will benefit you,”
Matthew 15:6	then he shall not honor his father or his mother.’ So have you nullified the commandment of God, for the sake of your tradition.
Matthew 15:7	Hypocrites! How well did Isaiah prophesy about you, saying:
Matthew 15:8	‘This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
Matthew 15:9	For in vain do they worship me, teaching the doctrines and commandments of men.’ ”
Matthew 15:10	And having called the multitudes to him, he said to them: “Listen and understand.
Matthew 15:11	A man is not defiled by what enters into the mouth, but by what proceeds from the mouth. This is what defiles a man.”
Matthew 15:12	Then his disciples drew near and said to him, “Do you know that the Pharisees, upon hearing this word, were offended?”
Matthew 15:13	But in response he said: “Every plant which has not been planted by my heavenly Father shall be uprooted.
Matthew 15:14	Leave them alone. They are blind, and they lead the blind. But if the blind are in charge of the blind, both will fall into the pit.”
Matthew 15:15	And responding, Peter said to him, “Explain this parable to us.”
Matthew 15:16	But he said: “Are you, even now, without understanding?
Matthew 15:17	Do you not understand that everything that enters into the mouth goes into the gut, and is cast into the sewer?
Matthew 15:18	But what proceeds from the mouth, goes forth from the heart, and those are the things that defile a man.
Matthew 15:19	For from the heart go out evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies, blasphemies.
Matthew 15:20	These are the things that defile a man. But to eat without washing hands does not defile a man.”
Matthew 15:21	And departing from there, Jesus withdrew into the areas of Tyre and Sidon.
Matthew 15:22	And behold, a woman of Canaan, going out from those parts, cried out, saying to him: “Take pity on me, Lord, Son of David. My daughter is badly afflicted by a demon.”
Matthew 15:23	He did not say a word to her. And his disciples, drawing near, petitioned him, saying: “Dismiss her, for she is crying out after us.”
Matthew 15:24	And responding, he said, “I was not sent except to the sheep who have fallen away from the house of Israel.”
Matthew 15:25	But she approached and adored him, saying, “Lord, help me.”
Matthew 15:26	And responding, he said, “It is not good to take the bread of the children and cast it to the dogs.”
Matthew 15:27	But she said, “Yes, Lord, but the young dogs also eat from the crumbs that fall from the table of their masters.”
Matthew 15:28	Then Jesus, responding, said to her: “O woman, great is your faith. Let it be done for you just as you wish.” And her daughter was healed from that very hour.
Matthew 15:29	And when Jesus had passed from there, he arrived beside the sea of Galilee. And ascending onto a mountain, he sat down there.
Matthew 15:30	And great multitudes came to him, having with them the mute, the blind, the lame, the disabled, and many others. And they cast them down at his feet, and he cured them,
Matthew 15:31	so much so that the crowds wondered, seeing the mute speaking, the lame walking, the blind seeing. And they magnified the God of Israel.
Matthew 15:32	And Jesus, calling together his disciples, said: “I have compassion on the crowds, because they have persevered with me now for three days, and they do not have anything to eat. And I am not willing to dismiss them, fasting, lest they faint along the way.”
Matthew 15:33	And the disciples said to him: “From where, then, in the desert, would we obtain enough bread to satisfy so a great multitude?”
Matthew 15:34	And Jesus said to them, “How many loaves of bread do you have?” But they said, “Seven, and a few little fish.”
Matthew 15:35	And he instructed the crowds to recline upon the ground.
Matthew 15:36	And taking the seven loaves and the fish, and giving thanks, he broke and gave to his disciples, and the disciples gave to the people.
Matthew 15:37	And they all ate and were satisfied. And, from what was left over of the fragments, they took up seven full baskets.
Matthew 15:38	But those who ate were four thousand men, plus children and women.
Matthew 15:39	And having dismissed the crowd, he climbed into a boat. And he went into the coastal region of Magadan.
Matthew 16:1	And Pharisees and Sadducees approached him to test him, and they asked him to show them a sign from heaven.
Matthew 16:2	But he responded by saying to them: “When evening arrives, you say, ‘It will be calm, for the sky is red,’
Matthew 16:3	and in the morning, ‘Today there will be a storm, for the sky is red and gloomy.’ So then, you know how to judge the appearance of the sky, but you are unable to know the signs of the times?
Matthew 16:4	An evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign. And a sign shall not be given to it, except the sign of the prophet Jonah.” And leaving them behind, he went away.
Matthew 16:5	And when his disciples went across the sea, they forgot to bring bread.
Matthew 16:6	And he said to them, “Consider and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees.”
Matthew 16:7	But they were thinking within themselves, saying, “It is because we have not brought bread.”
Matthew 16:8	Then Jesus, knowing this, said: “Why do you consider within yourselves, O little in faith, that it is because you have no bread?
Matthew 16:9	Do you not yet understand, nor remember, the five loaves among the five thousand men, and how many containers you took up?
Matthew 16:10	Or the seven loaves among the four thousand men, and how many baskets you took up?
Matthew 16:11	Why do you not understand that it was not because of bread that I said to you: Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees?”
Matthew 16:12	Then they understood that he was not saying that they should beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and the Sadducees.
Matthew 16:13	Then Jesus went into parts of Caesarea Philippi. And he questioned his disciples, saying, “Who do men say that the Son of man is?”
Matthew 16:14	And they said, “Some say John the Baptist, and others say Elijah, still others say Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
Matthew 16:15	Jesus said to them, “But who do you say that I am?”
Matthew 16:16	Simon Peter responded by saying, “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
Matthew 16:17	And in response, Jesus said to him: “Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah. For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father, who is in heaven.
Matthew 16:18	And I say to you, that you are Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.
Matthew 16:19	And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And whatever you shall bind on earth shall be bound, even in heaven. And whatever you shall release on earth shall be released, even in heaven.”
Matthew 16:20	Then he instructed his disciples that they should tell no one that he is Jesus the Christ.
Matthew 16:21	From that time, Jesus began to reveal to his disciples that it was necessary for him to go to Jerusalem, and to suffer much from the elders and the scribes and the leaders of the priests, and to be killed, and to rise again on the third day.
Matthew 16:22	And Peter, taking him aside, began to rebuke him, saying, “Lord, may it be far from you; this shall not happen to you.”
Matthew 16:23	And turning away, Jesus said to Peter: “Get behind me, Satan; you are an obstacle to me. For you are not behaving according to what is of God, but according to what is of men.”
Matthew 16:24	Then Jesus said to his disciples: “If anyone is willing to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
Matthew 16:25	For whoever would save his life, will lose it. But whoever will have lost his life for my sake, shall find it.
Matthew 16:26	For how does it benefit a man, if he gains the whole world, yet truly suffers damage to his soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
Matthew 16:27	For the Son of man will arrive in the glory of his Father, with his Angels. And then he will repay each one according to his works.
Matthew 16:28	Amen I say to you, there are some among those standing here, who shall not taste death, until they see the Son of man arriving in his reign.”
Matthew 17:1	And after six days, Jesus took Peter and James and his brother John, and he led them onto a lofty mountain separately.
Matthew 17:2	And he was transfigured before them. And his face shined brightly like the sun. And his garments were made white like snow.
Matthew 17:3	And behold, there appeared to them Moses and Elijah, speaking with him.
Matthew 17:4	And Peter responded by saying to Jesus: “Lord, it is good for us to be here. If you are willing, let us make three tabernacles here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
Matthew 17:5	And while he was still speaking, behold, a shining cloud overshadowed them. And behold, there was a voice from the cloud, saying: “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased. Listen to him.”
Matthew 17:6	And the disciples, hearing this, fell prone on their face, and they were very afraid.
Matthew 17:7	And Jesus drew near and touched them. And he said to them, “Rise up and do not be afraid.”
Matthew 17:8	And lifting up their eyes, they saw no one, except Jesus alone.
Matthew 17:9	And as they were descending from the mountain, Jesus instructed them, saying, “Tell no one about the vision, until the Son of man has risen from the dead.”
Matthew 17:10	And his disciples questioned him, saying, “Why then do the scribes say that it is necessary for Elijah to arrive first?”
Matthew 17:11	But in response, he said to them: “Elijah, indeed, shall arrive and restore all things.
Matthew 17:12	But I say to you, that Elijah has already arrived, and they did not recognize him, but they did whatever they wanted to him. So also shall the Son of man suffer from them.”
Matthew 17:13	Then the disciples understood that he had spoken to them about John the Baptist.
Matthew 17:14	And when he had arrived at the multitude, a man approached him, falling to his knees before him, saying:
Matthew 17:15	“Lord, take pity on my son, for he is an epileptic, and he suffers harm. For he frequently falls into fire, and often also into water.
Matthew 17:16	And I brought him to your disciples, but they were not able to cure him.”
Matthew 17:17	Then Jesus responded by saying: “What an unbelieving and perverse generation! How long shall I be with you? How long shall I endure you? Bring him here to me.”
Matthew 17:18	And Jesus rebuked him, and the demon went out of him, and the boy was cured from that hour.
Matthew 17:19	Then the disciples approached Jesus privately and said, “Why were we unable to cast him out?”
Matthew 17:20	Jesus said to them: “Because of your unbelief. Amen I say to you, certainly, if you will have faith like a grain of mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it shall move. And nothing will be impossible for you.
Matthew 17:21	But this kind is not cast out, except through prayer and fasting.”
Matthew 17:22	And when they were conversing together in Galilee, Jesus said to them: “The Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men.
Matthew 17:23	And they will kill him, but he will rise again on the third day.” And they were extremely saddened.
Matthew 17:24	And when they had arrived at Capernaum, those who collected the half shekel approached Peter, and they said to him, “Doesn’t your Teacher pay the half shekel?”
Matthew 17:25	He said, “Yes.” And when he had entered into the house, Jesus went before him, saying: “How does it seem to you, Simon? The kings of the earth, from whom do they receive tribute or the census tax: from their own sons or from foreigners?”
Matthew 17:26	And he said, “From foreigners.” Jesus said to him: “Then the sons are free.
Matthew 17:27	But so that we may not become an obstacle to them: go to the sea, and cast in a hook, and take the first fish that is brought up, and when you have opened its mouth, you will find a shekel. Take it and give it to them, for me and for you.”
Matthew 18:1	In that hour, the disciples drew near to Jesus, saying, “Whom do you consider to be greater in the kingdom of heaven?”
Matthew 18:2	And Jesus, calling to himself a little child, placed him in their midst.
Matthew 18:3	And he said: “Amen I say to you, unless you change and become like little children, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew 18:4	Therefore, whoever will have humbled himself like this little child, such a one is greater in the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew 18:5	And whoever shall accept one such little child in my name, accepts me.
Matthew 18:6	But whoever will have led astray one of these little ones, who trust in me, it would be better for him to have a great millstone hung around his neck, and to be submerged in the depths of the sea.
Matthew 18:7	Woe to a world that leads people astray! Although it is necessary for temptations to arise, nevertheless: Woe to that man through whom temptation arises!
Matthew 18:8	So if your hand or your foot leads you to sin, cut it off and cast it away from you. It is better for you to enter into life disabled or lame, than to be sent into eternal fire having two hands or two feet.
Matthew 18:9	And if your eye leads you to sin, root it out and cast it away from you. It is better for you to enter into life with one eye, than to be sent into the fires of Hell having two eyes.
Matthew 18:10	See to it that you do not despise even one of these little ones. For I say to you, that their Angels in heaven continually look upon the face of my Father, who is in heaven.
Matthew 18:11	For the Son of man has come to save what had been lost.
Matthew 18:12	How does it seem to you? If someone has one hundred sheep, and if one of them has gone astray, should he not leave behind the ninety-nine in the mountains, and go out to seek what has gone astray?
Matthew 18:13	And if he should happen to find it: Amen I say to you, that he has more joy over that one, than over the ninety-nine which did not go astray.
Matthew 18:14	Even so, it is not the will before your Father, who is in heaven, that one of these little ones should be lost.
Matthew 18:15	But if your brother has sinned against you, go and correct him, between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you will have regained your brother.
Matthew 18:16	But if he will not listen you, invite with you one or two more, so that every word may stand by the mouth of two or three witnesses.
Matthew 18:17	And if he will not listen to them, tell the Church. But if he will not listen to the Church, let him be to you like the pagan and the tax collector.
Matthew 18:18	Amen I say to you, whatever you will have bound on earth, shall be bound also in heaven, and whatever you will have released on earth, shall be released also in heaven.
Matthew 18:19	Again I say to you, that if two of those among you have agreed on earth, about anything whatsoever that they have requested, it shall be done for them by my Father, who is in heaven.
Matthew 18:20	For wherever two or three are gathered in my name, there am I, in their midst.”
Matthew 18:21	Then Peter, drawing near to him, said: “Lord, how many times shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Even seven times?”
Matthew 18:22	Jesus said to him: “I do not say to you, even seven times, but even seventy times seven times.
Matthew 18:23	Therefore, the kingdom of heaven is compared to a man who was king, who wanted to take account of his servants.
Matthew 18:24	And when he had begun taking account, one was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents.
Matthew 18:25	But since he did not have any way to repay it, his lord ordered him to be sold, with his wife and children, and all that he had, in order to repay it.
Matthew 18:26	But that servant, falling prostrate, begged him, saying, ‘Have patience with me, and I will repay it all to you.’
Matthew 18:27	Then the lord of that servant, being moved with pity, released him, and he forgave his debt.
Matthew 18:28	But when that servant departed, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him one hundred denarius. And taking hold of him, he choked him, saying: ‘Repay what you owe.’
Matthew 18:29	And his fellow servant, falling prostrate, petitioned him, saying: ‘Have patience with me, and I will repay it all to you.’
Matthew 18:30	But he was not willing. Instead, he went out and had him sent to prison, until he would repay the debt.
Matthew 18:31	Now his fellow servants, seeing what was done, were greatly saddened, and they went and reported to their lord all that was done.
Matthew 18:32	Then his lord called him, and he said to him: ‘You wicked servant, I forgave you all your debt, because you pleaded with me.
Matthew 18:33	Therefore, should you not also have had compassion on your fellow servant, just as I also had compassion on you?’
Matthew 18:34	And his lord, being angry, handed him over to the torturers, until he repaid the entire debt.
Matthew 18:35	So, too, shall my heavenly Father do to you, if each one of you will not forgive his brother from your hearts.”
Matthew 19:1	And it happened that, when Jesus had completed these words, he moved away from Galilee, and he arrived within the borders of Judea, across the Jordan.
Matthew 19:2	And great crowds followed him, and he healed them there.
Matthew 19:3	And the Pharisees approached him, testing him, and saying, “Is it lawful for a man to separate from his wife, no matter what the cause?”
Matthew 19:4	And he said to them in response, “Have you not read that he who made man from the beginning, made them male and female?” And he said:
Matthew 19:5	“For this reason, a man shall separate from father and mother, and he shall cling to his wife, and these two shall become one flesh.
Matthew 19:6	And so, now they are not two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has joined together, let no man separate.”
Matthew 19:7	They said to him, “Then why did Moses command him to give a bill of divorce, and to separate?”
Matthew 19:8	He said to them: “Although Moses permitted you to separate from your wives, due to the hardness of your heart, it was not that way from the beginning.
Matthew 19:9	And I say to you, that whoever will have separated from his wife, except because of fornication, and who will have married another, commits adultery, and whoever will have married her who has been separated, commits adultery.”
Matthew 19:10	His disciples said to him, “If such is the case for a man with a wife, then it is not expedient to marry.”
Matthew 19:11	And he said to them: “Not everyone is able to grasp this word, but only those to whom it has been given.
Matthew 19:12	For there are chaste persons who were born so from their mother’s womb, and there are chaste persons who have been made so by men, and there are chaste persons who have made themselves chaste for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. Whoever is able to grasp this, let him grasp it.”
Matthew 19:13	Then they brought to him little children, so that he would place his hands upon them and pray. But the disciples rebuked them.
Matthew 19:14	Yet truly, Jesus said to them: “Allow the little children to come to me, and do not choose to prohibit them. For the kingdom of heaven is among such as these.”
Matthew 19:15	And when he had imposed his hands upon them, he went away from there.
Matthew 19:16	And behold, someone approached and said to him, “Good Teacher, what good should I do, so that I may have eternal life?”
Matthew 19:17	And he said to him: “Why do you question me about what is good? One is good: God. But if you wish to enter into life, observe the commandments.”
Matthew 19:18	He said to him, “Which?” And Jesus said: “You shall not murder. You shall not commit adultery. You shall not steal. You shall not give false testimony.
Matthew 19:19	Honor your father and your mother. And, you shall love your neighbor as yourself.”
Matthew 19:20	The young man said to him: “All these I have kept from my childhood. What is still lacking for me?”
Matthew 19:21	Jesus said to him: “If you are willing to be perfect, go, sell what you have, and give to the poor, and then you will have treasure in heaven. And come, follow me.”
Matthew 19:22	And when the young man had heard this word, he went away sad, for he had many possessions.
Matthew 19:23	Then Jesus said to his disciples: “Amen, I say to you, that the wealthy shall enter with difficulty into the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew 19:24	And again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than for the wealthy to enter into the kingdom of heaven.”
Matthew 19:25	And upon hearing this, the disciples wondered greatly, saying: “Then who will be able to be saved?”
Matthew 19:26	But Jesus, gazing at them, said to them: “With men, this is impossible. But with God, all things are possible.”
Matthew 19:27	Then Peter responded by saying to him: “Behold, we have left behind all things, and we have followed you. So then, what will be for us?”
Matthew 19:28	And Jesus said to them: “Amen I say to you, that at the resurrection, when the Son of man shall sit on the seat of his majesty, those of you who have followed me shall also sit on twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Matthew 19:29	And anyone who has left behind home, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or land, for the sake of my name, shall receive one hundred times more, and shall possess eternal life.
Matthew 19:30	But many of those who are first shall be last, and the last shall be first.”
Matthew 20:1	“The kingdom of heaven is like the father of a family who went out in early morning to lead workers into his vineyard.
Matthew 20:2	Then, having made an agreement with the workers for one denarius per day, he sent them into his vineyard.
Matthew 20:3	And going out about the third hour, he saw others standing idle in the marketplace.
Matthew 20:4	And he said to them, ‘You may go into my vineyard, too, and what I will give you will be just.’
Matthew 20:5	So they went forth. But again, he went out about the sixth, and about the ninth hour, and he acted similarly.
Matthew 20:6	Yet truly, about the eleventh hour, he went out and found others standing, and he said to them, ‘Why have you stood here idle all day?’
Matthew 20:7	They say to him, ‘Because no one has hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You also may go into my vineyard.’
Matthew 20:8	And when evening had arrived, the lord of the vineyard said to his manager, ‘Call the workers and pay them their wages, beginning from the last, even to the first.’
Matthew 20:9	And so, when those who had arrived about the eleventh hour came forward, each received a single denarius.
Matthew 20:10	Then when the first ones also came forward, they considered that they would receive more. But they, too, received one denarius.
Matthew 20:11	And upon receiving it, they murmured against the father of the family,
Matthew 20:12	saying, ‘These last have worked for one hour, and you have made them equal to us, who worked bearing the weight and heat of the day.’
Matthew 20:13	But responding to one of them, he said: ‘Friend, I caused you no injury. Did you not agree with me to one denarius?
Matthew 20:14	Take what is yours and go. But it is my will to give to this last, just as to you.
Matthew 20:15	And is it not lawful for me to do what I will? Or is your eye wicked because I am good?’
Matthew 20:16	So then, the last shall be first, and the first shall be last. For many are called, but few are chosen.”
Matthew 20:17	And Jesus, ascending to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples aside in private and said to them:
Matthew 20:18	“Behold, we are ascending to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be handed over to the leaders of the priests and to the scribes. And they shall condemn him to death.
Matthew 20:19	And they shall hand him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and scourged and crucified. And on the third day, he shall rise again.”
Matthew 20:20	Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee approached him, with her sons, adoring him, and petitioning something from him.
Matthew 20:21	And he said to her, “What do you want?” She said to him, “Declare that these, my two sons, may sit, one at your right hand, and the other at your left, in your kingdom.”
Matthew 20:22	But Jesus, responding, said: “You do not know what you are asking. Are you able to drink from the chalice, from which I will drink?” They said to him, “We are able.”
Matthew 20:23	He said to them: “From my chalice, indeed, you shall drink. But to sit at my right or my left is not mine to give to you, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.”
Matthew 20:24	And the ten, upon hearing this, became indignant with the two brothers.
Matthew 20:25	But Jesus called them to himself and said: “You know that the first ones among the Gentiles are their rulers, and that those who are greater exercise power among them.
Matthew 20:26	It shall not be this way among you. But whoever will want to be greater among you, let him be your minister.
Matthew 20:27	And whoever will want to be first among you, he shall be your servant,
Matthew 20:28	even as the Son of man has not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a redemption for many.”
Matthew 20:29	And as they were departing from Jericho, a great crowd followed him.
Matthew 20:30	And behold, two blind men, sitting by the way, heard that Jesus was passing by; and they cried out, saying, “Lord, Son of David, take pity on us.”
Matthew 20:31	But the crowd rebuked them to be quiet. But they cried out all the more, saying, “Lord, Son of David, take pity on us.”
Matthew 20:32	And Jesus stood still, and he called them and said, “What do you want, that I might do for you?”
Matthew 20:33	They said to him, “Lord, that our eyes be opened.”
Matthew 20:34	Then Jesus, taking pity on them, touched their eyes. And immediately they saw, and they followed him.
Matthew 21:1	And when they had drawn near to Jerusalem, and had arrived at Bethphage, at the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
Matthew 21:2	saying to them: “Go into the town that is opposite you, and immediately you will find a donkey tied, and a colt with her. Release them, and lead them to me.
Matthew 21:3	And if anyone will have said anything to you, say that the Lord has need of them. And he will promptly dismiss them.”
Matthew 21:4	Now all this was done in order to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet, saying,
Matthew 21:5	“Tell the daughter of Zion: Behold, your king comes to you meekly, sitting on a donkey and on a colt, the son of one accustomed to the yoke.”
Matthew 21:6	Then the disciples, going out, did just as Jesus instructed them.
Matthew 21:7	And they brought the donkey and the colt, and they laid their garments on them, and they helped him sit upon them.
Matthew 21:8	Then a very numerous crowd spread their garments on the way. But others cut branches from the trees and scattered them on the way.
Matthew 21:9	And the crowds that preceded him, and those that followed, cried out, saying: “Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest!”
Matthew 21:10	And when he had entered into Jerusalem, the entire city was stirred up, saying, “Who is this?”
Matthew 21:11	But the people were saying, “This is Jesus, the Prophet from Nazareth of Galilee.”
Matthew 21:12	And Jesus entered into the temple of God, and he cast out all who were selling and buying in the temple, and he overturned the tables of the money changers and the chairs of the vendors of doves.
Matthew 21:13	And he said to them: “It is written: ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer. But you have made it into a den of robbers.’ ”
Matthew 21:14	And the blind and the lame drew near to him in the temple; and he healed them.
Matthew 21:15	Then the leaders of the priests and the scribes became indignant, seeing the miracles that he wrought, and the children crying out in the temple, saying, “Hosanna to the Son of David!”
Matthew 21:16	And they said to him, “Do you hear what these ones are saying?” But Jesus said to them, “Certainly. Have you never read: For out of the mouth of babes and infants, you have perfected praise?”
Matthew 21:17	And leaving them behind, he went out, beyond the city, into Bethania, and he lodged here.
Matthew 21:18	Then, as he was returning to the city in the morning, he was hungry.
Matthew 21:19	And seeing a certain fig tree beside the way, he approached it. And he found nothing on it, except only leaves. And he said to it, “May fruit never spring forth from you, for all time.” And immediately the fig tree was dried up.
Matthew 21:20	And seeing this, the disciples wondered, saying, “How did it dry up so quickly?”
Matthew 21:21	And Jesus responded to them by saying: “Amen I say to you, if you have faith and do not hesitate, not only shall you do this, concerning the fig tree, but even if you would say to this mountain, ‘Take and cast yourself into the sea,’ it shall be done.
Matthew 21:22	And all things whatsoever that you shall ask for in prayer: believing, you shall receive.”
Matthew 21:23	And when he had arrived at the temple, as he was teaching, the leaders of the priests and the elders of the people approached him, saying: “By what authority do you do these things? And who has given this authority to you?”
Matthew 21:24	In response, Jesus said to them: “I also will question you with one word: if you tell me this, I also will tell you by what authority I do these things.
Matthew 21:25	The baptism of John, where was it from? Was it from heaven, or from men?” But they thought within themselves, saying:
Matthew 21:26	“If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say to us, ‘Then why did you not believe him?’ But if we say, ‘From men,’ we have the crowd to fear, for they all hold John to be a prophet.”
Matthew 21:27	And so, they answered Jesus by saying, “We do not know.” So he also said to them: “Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.
Matthew 21:28	But how does it seem to you? A certain man had two sons. And approaching the first, he said: ‘Son, go out today to work in my vineyard.’
Matthew 21:29	And responding, he said, ‘I am not willing.’ But afterwards, being moved by repentance, he went.
Matthew 21:30	And approaching the other, he spoke similarly. And answering, he said, ‘I am going, lord.’ And he did not go.
Matthew 21:31	Which of the two did the will of the father?” They said to him, “The first.” Jesus said to them: “Amen I say to you, that tax collectors and prostitutes shall precede you, into the kingdom of God.
Matthew 21:32	For John came to you in the way of justice, and you did not believe him. But the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him. Yet even after seeing this, you did not repent, so as to believe him.
Matthew 21:33	Listen to another parable. There was a man, the father of a family, who planted a vineyard, and surrounded it with a hedge, and dug a press in it, and built a tower. And he loaned it out to farmers, and he set out to sojourn abroad.
Matthew 21:34	Then, when the time of the fruits drew near, he sent his servants to the farmers, so that they might receive its fruits.
Matthew 21:35	And the farmers apprehended his servants; they struck one, and killed another, and stoned yet another.
Matthew 21:36	Again, he sent other servants, more than before; and they treated them similarly.
Matthew 21:37	Then, at the very end, he sent his son to them, saying: ‘They will revere my son.’
Matthew 21:38	But the farmers, seeing the son, said among themselves: ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and then we will have his inheritance.’
Matthew 21:39	And apprehending him, they cast him outside the vineyard, and they killed him.
Matthew 21:40	Therefore, when the lord of the vineyard arrives, what will he do to those farmers?”
Matthew 21:41	They said to him, “He will bring those evil men to an evil end, and he will loan out his vineyard to other farmers, who shall repay to him the fruit in its time.”
Matthew 21:42	Jesus said to them: “Have you never read in the Scriptures: ‘The stone that the builders have rejected has become the cornerstone. By the Lord has this been done, and it is wonderful in our eyes?’
Matthew 21:43	Therefore, I say to you, that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and it shall be given to a people who shall produce its fruits.
Matthew 21:44	And whoever will have fallen on this stone shall be broken, yet truly, on whomever it shall fall, it will crush him.”
Matthew 21:45	And when the leaders of the priests, and the Pharisees had heard his parables, they knew that he was speaking about them.
Matthew 21:46	And though they sought to take hold of him, they feared the crowds, because they held him to be a prophet.
Matthew 22:1	And responding, Jesus again spoke to them in parables, saying:
Matthew 22:2	“The kingdom of heaven is like a man who was king, who celebrated a wedding for his son.
Matthew 22:3	And he sent his servants to call those who were invited to the wedding. But they were not willing to come.
Matthew 22:4	Again, he sent other servants, saying, ‘Tell the invited: Behold, I have prepared my meal. My bulls and fatlings have been killed, and all is ready. Come to the wedding.’
Matthew 22:5	But they ignored this and they went away: one to his country estate, and another to his business.
Matthew 22:6	Yet truly, the rest took hold of his servants and, having treated them with contempt, killed them.
Matthew 22:7	But when the king heard this, he was angry. And sending out his armies, he destroyed those murderers, and he burned their city.
Matthew 22:8	Then he said to his servants: ‘The wedding, indeed, has been prepared. But those who were invited were not worthy.
Matthew 22:9	Therefore, go out to the ways, and call whomever you will find to the wedding.’
Matthew 22:10	And his servants, departing into the ways, gathered all those whom they found, bad and good, and the wedding was filled with guests.
Matthew 22:11	Then the king entered to see the guests. And he saw a man there who was not clothed in a wedding garment.
Matthew 22:12	And he said to him, ‘Friend, how is it that you have entered here without having a wedding garment?’ But he was dumbstruck.
Matthew 22:13	Then the king said to the ministers: ‘Bind his hands and feet, and cast him into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Matthew 22:14	For many are called, but few are chosen.’ ”
Matthew 22:15	Then the Pharisees, going out, took counsel as to how they might entrap him in speech.
Matthew 22:16	And they sent their disciples to him, with the Herodians, saying: “Teacher, we know that you are truthful, and that you teach the way of God in truth, and that the influence of others is nothing to you. For you do not consider the reputation of men.
Matthew 22:17	Therefore, tell us, how does it seem to you? Is it lawful to pay the census tax to Caesar, or not?”
Matthew 22:18	But Jesus, knowing their wickedness, said: “Why do you test me, you hypocrites?
Matthew 22:19	Show me the coin of the census tax.” And they offered him a denarius.
Matthew 22:20	And Jesus said to them, “Whose image is this, and whose inscription?”
Matthew 22:21	They said to him, “Caesar’s.” Then he said to them, “Then render to Caesar what is of Caesar; and to God what is of God.”
Matthew 22:22	And hearing this, they wondered. And having left him behind, they went away.
Matthew 22:23	In that day, the Sadducees, who say there is to be no resurrection, approached him. And they questioned him,
Matthew 22:24	saying: “Teacher, Moses said: If anyone will have died, having no son, his brother shall marry his wife, and he shall raise up offspring to his brother.
Matthew 22:25	Now there were seven brothers with us. And the first, having taken a wife, died. And having no offspring, he left his wife to his brother:
Matthew 22:26	similarly with the second, and the third, even to the seventh.
Matthew 22:27	And last of all, the woman also passed away.
Matthew 22:28	In the resurrection, then, whose wife of the seven will she be? For they all had her.”
Matthew 22:29	But Jesus responded to them by saying: “You have gone astray by knowing neither the Scriptures, nor the power of God.
Matthew 22:30	For in the resurrection, they shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage. Instead, they shall be like the Angels of God in heaven.
Matthew 22:31	But concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was spoken by God, saying to you:
Matthew 22:32	‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?’ He is not the God of the dead, but of the living.”
Matthew 22:33	And when the crowds heard this, they wondered at his doctrine.
Matthew 22:34	But the Pharisees, hearing that he had caused the Sadducees to be silent, came together as one.
Matthew 22:35	And one of them, a doctor of the law, questioned him, to test him:
Matthew 22:36	“Teacher, which is the great commandment in the law?”
Matthew 22:37	Jesus said to him: “ ‘You shall love the Lord your God from all your heart, and with all your soul and with all your mind.’
Matthew 22:38	This is the greatest and first commandment.
Matthew 22:39	But the second is similar to it: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’
Matthew 22:40	On these two commandments the entire law depends, and also the prophets.”
Matthew 22:41	Then, when the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus questioned them,
Matthew 22:42	saying: “What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?” They said to him, “David’s.”
Matthew 22:43	He said to them: “Then how can David, in the Spirit, call him Lord, saying:
Matthew 22:44	‘The Lord said to my Lord: Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies your footstool?’
Matthew 22:45	So then, if David calls him Lord, how can he be his son?”
Matthew 22:46	And no one was able to respond to him a word. And neither did anyone dare, from that day forward, to question him.
Matthew 23:1	Then Jesus spoke to the crowds, and to his disciples,
Matthew 23:2	saying: “The scribes and the Pharisees have sat down in the chair of Moses.
Matthew 23:3	Therefore, all things whatsoever that they shall say to you, observe and do. Yet truly, do not choose to act according to their works. For they say, but they do not do.
Matthew 23:4	For they bind up heavy and unbearable burdens, and they impose them on men’s shoulders. But they are not willing to move them with even a finger of their own.
Matthew 23:5	Truly, they do all their works so that they may be seen by men. For they enlarge their phylacteries and glorify their hems.
Matthew 23:6	And they love the first places at feasts, and the first chairs in the synagogues,
Matthew 23:7	and greetings in the marketplace, and to be called Master by men.
Matthew 23:8	But you must not be called Master. For One is your Master, and you are all brothers.
Matthew 23:9	And do not choose to call anyone on earth your father. For One is your Father, who is in heaven.
Matthew 23:10	Neither should you be called teachers. For One is your Teacher, the Christ.
Matthew 23:11	Whoever is greater among you shall be your minister.
Matthew 23:12	But whoever has exalted himself, shall be humbled. And whoever has humbled himself, shall be exalted.
Matthew 23:13	So then: Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! For you close the kingdom of heaven before men. For you yourselves do not enter, and those who are entering, you would not permit to enter.
Matthew 23:14	Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! For you consume the houses of widows, praying long prayers. Because of this, you shall receive the greater judgment.
Matthew 23:15	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! For you travel around by sea and by land, in order to make one convert. And when he has been converted, you make him twice the son of Hell that you are yourselves.
Matthew 23:16	Woe to you, blind guides, who say: ‘Whoever will have sworn by the temple, it is nothing. But whoever will have sworn by the gold of the temple is obligated.’
Matthew 23:17	You are foolish and blind! For which is greater: the gold, or the temple that sanctifies the gold?
Matthew 23:18	And you say: ‘Whoever will have sworn by the altar, it is nothing. But whoever will have sworn by the gift that is on the altar is obligated.’
Matthew 23:19	How blind you are! For which is greater: the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift?
Matthew 23:20	Therefore, whoever swears by the altar, swears by it, and by all that is on it.
Matthew 23:21	And whoever will have sworn by the temple, swears by it, and by him who dwells in it.
Matthew 23:22	And whoever swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by him who sits upon it.
Matthew 23:23	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! For you collect tithes on mint and dill and cumin, but you have abandoned the weightier things of the law: judgment and mercy and faith. These you ought to have done, while not omitting the others.
Matthew 23:24	You blind guides, straining out a gnat, while swallowing a camel!
Matthew 23:25	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! For you clean what is outside the cup and the dish, but on the inside you are full of avarice and impurity.
Matthew 23:26	You blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup and the dish, and then what is outside becomes clean.
Matthew 23:27	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! For you are like whitewashed sepulchers, which outwardly appear brilliant to men, yet truly, inside, they are filled with the bones of the dead and with all filth.
Matthew 23:28	So also, you certainly appear to men outwardly to be just. But inwardly you are filled with hypocrisy and iniquity.
Matthew 23:29	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites, who build the sepulchers of the prophets and adorn the monuments of the just.
Matthew 23:30	And then you say, ‘If we had been there in the days of our fathers, we would not have joined with them in the blood of the prophets.’
Matthew 23:31	And so you are witnesses against yourselves, that you are the sons of those who killed the prophets.
Matthew 23:32	Complete, then, the measure of your fathers.
Matthew 23:33	You serpents, you brood of vipers! How will you escape from the judgment of Hell?
Matthew 23:34	For this reason, behold, I send to you prophets and wisemen, and scribes. And some of these you will put to death and crucify; and some you will scourge in your synagogues and persecute from city to city,
Matthew 23:35	so that upon you may fall all the blood of the just, which has been shed upon the earth, from the blood of Abel the just, even to the blood of Zechariah the son of Barachiah, whom you killed between the temple and the altar.
Matthew 23:36	Amen I say to you, all these things shall fall upon this generation.
Matthew 23:37	Jerusalem, Jerusalem! You kill the prophets and stone those who have been sent to you. How often I have wanted to gather your children together, in the way that a hen gathers her young under her wings. But you were not willing!
Matthew 23:38	Behold, your house shall be abandoned to you, having been deserted.
Matthew 23:39	For I say to you, you shall not see me again, until you say: ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’ ”
Matthew 24:1	And Jesus departed from the temple and went away. And his disciples approached him, so as to show him the buildings of the temple.
Matthew 24:2	But he said to them in response: “Do you see all these things? Amen I say to you, there shall not remain here stone upon stone, which is not torn down.”
Matthew 24:3	Then, when he was seated at the Mount of Olives, the disciples drew near to him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be? And what will be the sign of your advent and of the consummation of the age?”
Matthew 24:4	And answering, Jesus said to them: “Pay attention, lest someone lead you astray.
Matthew 24:5	For many will come in my name saying, ‘I am the Christ.’ And they will lead many astray.
Matthew 24:6	For you will hear of battles and rumors of battles. Take care not to be disturbed. For these things must be, but the end is not so soon.
Matthew 24:7	For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. And there will be pestilences, and famines, and earthquakes in places.
Matthew 24:8	But all these things are just the beginning of the sorrows.
Matthew 24:9	Then they will hand you over to tribulation, and they will kill you. And you will be hated by all nations for the sake of my name.
Matthew 24:10	And then many will be led into sin, and will betray one another, and will have hatred for one another.
Matthew 24:11	And many false prophets will arise, and they will lead many astray.
Matthew 24:12	And because iniquity has abounded, the charity of many will grow cold.
Matthew 24:13	But whoever will have persevered until the end, the same shall be saved.
Matthew 24:14	And this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached throughout the entire world, as a testimony to all nations. And then the consummation will occur.
Matthew 24:15	Therefore, when you will have seen the abomination of desolation, which was spoken of by the prophet Daniel, standing in the holy place, may he who reads understand,
Matthew 24:16	then those who are in Judea, let them flee to the mountains.
Matthew 24:17	And whoever is on the roof, let him not descend to take anything from his house.
Matthew 24:18	And whoever is in the field, let him not turn back to take his tunic.
Matthew 24:19	So then, woe to those who are pregnant or nursing in those days.
Matthew 24:20	But pray that your flight may not be in winter, or on the Sabbath.
Matthew 24:21	For then there will be a great tribulation, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until the present, and such as will not be.
Matthew 24:22	And unless those days had been shortened, no flesh would be saved. But for the sake of the elect, those days shall be shortened.
Matthew 24:23	Then if anyone will have said to you, ‘Behold, here is the Christ,’ or ‘he is there,’ do not be willing to believe it.
Matthew 24:24	For there will arise false Christs and false prophets. And they will produce great signs and wonders, so much so as to lead into error even the elect (if this could be).
Matthew 24:25	Behold, I have warned you beforehand.
Matthew 24:26	Therefore, if they will have said to you, ‘Behold, he is in the desert,’ do not choose to go out, or, ‘Behold, he is in the inner rooms,’ do not be willing to believe it.
Matthew 24:27	For just as lightning goes out from the east, and appears even in the west, so shall it be also at the advent of the Son of man.
Matthew 24:28	Wherever the body shall be, there also will the eagles be gathered together.
Matthew 24:29	And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
Matthew 24:30	And then the sign of the Son of man shall appear in heaven. And then all tribes of the earth shall mourn. And they shall see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven, with great power and majesty.
Matthew 24:31	And he shall send out his Angels with a trumpet and a great voice. And they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from the heights of the heavens, even to their furthest limits.
Matthew 24:32	So, from the fig tree learn a parable. When its branch has now become tender and the leaves have sprung forth, you know that summer is near.
Matthew 24:33	So also, when you will have seen all these things, know that it is near, even at the threshold.
Matthew 24:34	Amen I say to you, that this lineage shall not pass away, until all these things have been done.
Matthew 24:35	Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.
Matthew 24:36	But concerning that day and hour, no one knows, not even the Angels of the heavens, but only the Father.
Matthew 24:37	And just as in the days of Noah, so also will be the advent of the Son of man.
Matthew 24:38	For it will be just as it was in the days before the flood: eating and drinking, marrying and being given in marriage, even until that day when Noah entered into the ark.
Matthew 24:39	And they did not realize it, until the flood came and took them all away. So also will the advent of the Son of man be.
Matthew 24:40	Then two men will be in a field: one will be taken up, and one will be left behind.
Matthew 24:41	Two women will be grinding at a millstone: one will be taken up, and one will be left behind.
Matthew 24:42	Therefore, be vigilant. For you do not know at what hour your Lord will return.
Matthew 24:43	But know this: if only the father of the family knew at what hour the thief would arrive, he would certainly keep vigil and not permit his house to be broken into.
Matthew 24:44	For this reason, you also must be prepared, for you do not know at what hour the Son of man will return.
Matthew 24:45	Consider this: who is a faithful and prudent servant, who has been appointed by his lord over his family, to give them their portion in due time?
Matthew 24:46	Blessed is that servant, if, when his lord has arrived, he shall find him doing so.
Matthew 24:47	Amen I say to you, he shall appoint him over all of his goods.
Matthew 24:48	But if that evil servant has said in his heart, ‘My lord has been delayed in returning,’
Matthew 24:49	and so, he begins to strike his fellow servants, and he eats and drinks with the inebriated:
Matthew 24:50	then the lord of that servant will arrive on a day that he does not expect, and at an hour that he does not know.
Matthew 24:51	And he shall separate him, and he shall place his portion with the hypocrites, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
Matthew 25:1	“Then the kingdom of heaven shall be like ten virgins, who, taking their lamps, went out to meet the groom and the bride.
Matthew 25:2	But five of them were foolish, and five were prudent.
Matthew 25:3	For the five foolish, having brought their lamps, did not take oil with them.
Matthew 25:4	Yet truly, the prudent ones brought the oil, in their containers, with the lamps.
Matthew 25:5	Since the bridegroom was delayed, they all fell asleep, and they were sleeping.
Matthew 25:6	But in the middle of the night, a cry went out: ‘Behold, the groom is arriving. Go out to meet him.’
Matthew 25:7	Then all those virgins rose up and trimmed their lamps.
Matthew 25:8	But the foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give to us from your oil, for our lamps are being extinguished.’
Matthew 25:9	The prudent responded by saying, ‘Lest perhaps there may not be enough for us and for you, it would be better for you to go to the vendors and buy some for yourselves.’
Matthew 25:10	But while they were going to buy it, the groom arrived. And those who were prepared entered with him to the wedding, and the door was closed.
Matthew 25:11	Yet truly, at the very end, the remaining virgins also arrived, saying, ‘Lord, Lord, open to us.’
Matthew 25:12	But he responded by saying, ‘Amen I say to you, I do not know you.’
Matthew 25:13	And so you must be vigilant, because you do not know the day or the hour.
Matthew 25:14	For it is like a man setting out on a long journey, who called his servants and delivered to them his goods.
Matthew 25:15	And to one he gave five talents, and to another two, yet to another he gave one, to each according to his own ability. And promptly, he set out.
Matthew 25:16	Then he who had received five talents went out, and he made use of these, and he gained another five.
Matthew 25:17	And similarly, he who had received two gained another two.
Matthew 25:18	But he who had received one, going out, dug into the earth, and he hid the money of his lord.
Matthew 25:19	Yet truly, after a long time, the lord of those servants returned and he settled accounts with them.
Matthew 25:20	And when he who had received five talents approached, he brought another five talents, saying: ‘Lord, you delivered five talents to me. Behold, I have increased it by another five.’
Matthew 25:21	His lord said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful servant. Since you have been faithful over a few things, I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the gladness of your lord.’
Matthew 25:22	Then he who had received two talents also approached, and he said: ‘Lord, you delivered two talents to me. Behold, I have gained another two.’
Matthew 25:23	His lord said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful servant. Since you have been faithful over a few things, I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the gladness of your lord.’
Matthew 25:24	Then he who had received one talent, approaching, said: ‘Lord, I know that you are a hard man. You reap where you have not sown, and gather where you have not scattered.
Matthew 25:25	And so, being afraid, I went out and hid your talent in the earth. Behold, you have what is yours.’
Matthew 25:26	But his lord said to him in response: ‘You evil and lazy servant! You knew that I reap where I have not sown, and gather where I have not scattered.
Matthew 25:27	Therefore, you should have deposited my money with the bankers, and then, at my arrival, at least I would have received what is mine with interest.
Matthew 25:28	And so, take the talent away from him and give it the one who has ten talents.
Matthew 25:29	For to everyone who has, more shall be given, and he shall have in abundance. But from him who has not, even what he seems to have, shall be taken away.
Matthew 25:30	And cast that useless servant into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
Matthew 25:31	But when the Son of man will have arrived in his majesty, and all the Angels with him, then he will sit upon the seat of his majesty.
Matthew 25:32	And all the nations shall be gathered together before him. And he shall separate them from one another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
Matthew 25:33	And he shall station the sheep, indeed, on his right, but the goats on his left.
Matthew 25:34	Then the King shall say to those who will be on his right: ‘Come, you blessed of my Father. Possess the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
Matthew 25:35	For I was hungry, and you gave me to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me to drink; I was a stranger, and you took me in;
Matthew 25:36	naked, and you covered me; sick, and you visited me; I was in prison, and you came to me.’
Matthew 25:37	Then the just will answer him, saying: ‘Lord, when have we see you hungry, and fed you; thirsty, and given you drink?
Matthew 25:38	And when have we seen you a stranger, and taken you in? Or naked, and covered you?
Matthew 25:39	Or when did we see you sick, or in prison, and visit to you?’
Matthew 25:40	And in response, the King shall say to them, ‘Amen I say to you, whenever you did this for one of these, the least of my brothers, you did it for me.’
Matthew 25:41	Then he shall also say, to those who will be on his left: ‘Depart from me, you accursed ones, into the eternal fire, which was prepared for the devil and his angels.
Matthew 25:42	For I was hungry, and you did not give me to eat; I was thirsty, and you did not give me to drink;
Matthew 25:43	I was a stranger and you did not take me in; naked, and you did not cover me; sick and in prison, and you did not visit me.’
Matthew 25:44	Then they will also answer him, saying: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister to you?’
Matthew 25:45	Then he shall respond to them by saying: ‘Amen I say to you, whenever you did not do it to one of these least, neither did you do it to me.’
Matthew 25:46	And these shall go into eternal punishment, but the just shall go into eternal life.”
Matthew 26:1	And it happened that, when Jesus had completed all these words, he said to his disciples,
Matthew 26:2	“You know that after two days the Passover will begin, and the Son of man will be handed over to be crucified.”
Matthew 26:3	Then the leaders of the priests and the elders of the people were gathered together in the court of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas.
Matthew 26:4	And they took counsel so that by deceitfulness they might take hold of Jesus and kill him.
Matthew 26:5	But they said, “Not on the feast day, lest perhaps there may be a tumult among the people.”
Matthew 26:6	And when Jesus was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper,
Matthew 26:7	a woman drew near to him, holding an alabaster box of precious ointment, and she poured it over his head while he was reclining at table.
Matthew 26:8	But the disciples, seeing this, were indignant, saying: “What is the purpose of this waste?
Matthew 26:9	For this could have been sold for a great deal, so as to be given to the poor.”
Matthew 26:10	But Jesus, knowing this, said to them: “Why are you bothering this woman? For she has done a good deed to me.
Matthew 26:11	For the poor you will always have with you. But you will not always have me.
Matthew 26:12	For in pouring this ointment on my body, she has prepared for my burial.
Matthew 26:13	Amen I say to you, wherever this Gospel will be preached in the whole world, what she has done also shall be told, in memory of her.”
Matthew 26:14	Then one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, went to the leaders of the priests,
Matthew 26:15	and he said to them, “What are you willing to give me, if I hand him over to you?” So they appointed thirty pieces of silver for him.
Matthew 26:16	And from then on, he sought an opportunity to betray him.
Matthew 26:17	Then, on the first day of Unleavened Bread, the disciples approached Jesus, saying, “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?”
Matthew 26:18	So Jesus said, “Go into the city, to a certain one, and say to him: ‘The Teacher said: My time is near. I am observing the Passover with you, along with my disciples.’ ”
Matthew 26:19	And the disciples did just as Jesus appointed to them. And they prepared the Passover.
Matthew 26:20	Then, when evening arrived, he sat at table with his twelve disciples.
Matthew 26:21	And while they were eating, he said: “Amen I say to you, that one of you is about to betray me.”
Matthew 26:22	And being greatly saddened, each one of them began to say, “Surely, it is not I, Lord?”
Matthew 26:23	But he responded by saying: “He who dips his hand with me into the dish, the same will betray me.
Matthew 26:24	Indeed, the Son of man goes, just as it has been written about him. But woe to that man by whom the Son of man will be betrayed. It would be better for that man if he had not been born.”
Matthew 26:25	Then Judas, who betrayed him, responded by saying, “Surely, it is not I, Master?” He said to him, “You have said it.”
Matthew 26:26	Now while they were eating the meal, Jesus took bread, and he blessed and broke and gave it to his disciples, and he said: “Take and eat. This is my body.”
Matthew 26:27	And taking the chalice, he gave thanks. And he gave it to them, saying: “Drink from this, all of you.
Matthew 26:28	For this is my blood of the new covenant, which shall be shed for many as a remission of sins.
Matthew 26:29	But I say to you, I will not drink again from this fruit of the vine, until that day when I will drink it new with you in the kingdom of my Father.”
Matthew 26:30	And after a hymn was sung, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Matthew 26:31	Then Jesus said to them: “You will all fall away from me in this night. For it has been written: ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’
Matthew 26:32	But after I have risen again, I will go before you to Galilee.”
Matthew 26:33	Then Peter responded by saying to him, “Even if everyone else has fallen away from you, I will never fall away.”
Matthew 26:34	Jesus said to him, “Amen I say to you, that in this night, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.”
Matthew 26:35	Peter said to him, “Even if it is necessary for me to die with you, I will not deny you.” And all the disciples spoke similarly.
Matthew 26:36	Then Jesus went with them to a garden, which is called Gethsemani. And he said to his disciples, “Sit down here, while I go there and pray.”
Matthew 26:37	And taking with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be sorrowful and saddened.
Matthew 26:38	Then he said to them: “My soul is sorrowful, even unto death. Stay here and keep vigil with me.”
Matthew 26:39	And continuing on a little further, he fell prostrate on his face, praying and saying: “My Father, if it is possible, let this chalice pass away from me. Yet truly, let it not be as I will, but as you will.”
Matthew 26:40	And he approached his disciples and found them sleeping. And he said to Peter: “So, were you not able to keep vigil with me for one hour?
Matthew 26:41	Be vigilant and pray, so that you may not enter into temptation. Indeed, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
Matthew 26:42	Again, a second time, he went and prayed, saying, “My Father, if this chalice cannot pass away, unless I drink it, let your will be done.”
Matthew 26:43	And again, he went and found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
Matthew 26:44	And leaving them behind, again he went and prayed for the third time, saying the same words.
Matthew 26:45	Then he approached his disciples and said to them: “Sleep now and rest. Behold, the hour has drawn near, and the Son of man will be delivered into the hands of sinners.
Matthew 26:46	Rise up; let us go. Behold, he who will betray me draws near.”
Matthew 26:47	While he was still speaking, behold, Judas, one of the twelve, arrived, and with him was a large crowd with swords and clubs, sent from the leaders of the priests and the elders of the people.
Matthew 26:48	And he who betrayed him gave them a sign, saying: “Whomever I will kiss, it is he. Take hold of him.”
Matthew 26:49	And quickly drawing close to Jesus, he said, “Hail, Master.” And he kissed him.
Matthew 26:50	And Jesus said to him, “Friend, for what purpose have you come?” Then they approached, and they put their hands on Jesus, and they held him.
Matthew 26:51	And behold, one of those who were with Jesus, extending his hand, drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
Matthew 26:52	Then Jesus said to him: “Put your sword back in its place. For all who take up the sword shall perish by the sword.
Matthew 26:53	Or do you think that I cannot ask my Father, so that he would give me, even now, more than twelve legions of Angels?
Matthew 26:54	How then would the Scriptures be fulfilled, which say that it must be so?”
Matthew 26:55	In that same hour, Jesus said to the crowds: “You went out, as if to a robber, with swords and clubs to seize me. Yet I sat daily with you, teaching in the temple, and you did not take hold of me.
Matthew 26:56	But all this has happened so that the Scriptures of the prophets may be fulfilled.” Then all the disciples fled, abandoning him.
Matthew 26:57	But those who were holding Jesus led him to Caiaphas, the high priest, where the scribes and the elders had joined together.
Matthew 26:58	Then Peter followed him from a distance, as far as the court of the high priest. And going inside, he sat down with the servants, so that he might see the end.
Matthew 26:59	Then the leaders of the priests and the entire council sought false testimony against Jesus, so that they might deliver him to death.
Matthew 26:60	And they did not find any, even though many false witnesses had come forward. Then, at the very end, two false witnesses came forward,
Matthew 26:61	and they said, “This man said: ‘I am able to destroy the temple of God, and, after three days, to rebuild it.’ ”
Matthew 26:62	And the high priest, rising up, said to him, “Have you nothing to respond to what these ones testify against you?”
Matthew 26:63	But Jesus was silent. And the high priest said to him, “I bind you by an oath to the living God to tell us if you are the Christ, the Son of God.”
Matthew 26:64	Jesus said to him: “You have said it. Yet truly I say to you, hereafter you shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of the power of God, and coming on the clouds of heaven.”
Matthew 26:65	Then the high priest tore his garments, saying: “He has blasphemed. Why do we still need witnesses? Behold, you have now heard the blasphemy.
Matthew 26:66	How does it seem to you?” So they responded by saying, “He is guilty unto death.”
Matthew 26:67	Then they spit in his face, and they struck him with fists. And others struck his face with the palms of their hands,
Matthew 26:68	saying: “Prophesy for us, O Christ. Who is the one that struck you?”
Matthew 26:69	Yet truly, Peter sat outside in the courtyard. And a maidservant approached him, saying, “You also were with Jesus the Galilean.”
Matthew 26:70	But he denied it in the sight of them all, saying, “I do not know what you are saying.”
Matthew 26:71	Then, as he exited by the gate, another maidservant saw him. And she said to those who were there, “This man also was with Jesus of Nazareth.”
Matthew 26:72	And again, he denied it with an oath, “For I do not know the man.”
Matthew 26:73	And after a little while, those who were standing nearby came and said to Peter: “Truly, you also are one of them. For even your manner of speaking reveals you.”
Matthew 26:74	Then he began to curse and to swear that he had not known the man. And immediately the rooster crowed.
Matthew 26:75	And Peter remembered the words of Jesus, which he had said: “Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.” And going outside, he wept bitterly.
Matthew 27:1	Then, when morning arrived, all the leaders of the priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus, so that they might deliver him to death.
Matthew 27:2	And they led him, bound, and handed him over to Pontius Pilate, the procurator.
Matthew 27:3	Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing that he had been condemned, regretting his conduct, brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the leaders of the priests and the elders,
Matthew 27:4	saying, “I have sinned in betraying just blood.” But they said to him: “What is that to us? See to it yourself.”
Matthew 27:5	And throwing down the pieces of silver in the temple, he departed. And going out, he hanged himself with a snare.
Matthew 27:6	But the leaders of the priests, having taken up the pieces of silver, said, “It is not lawful to put them into the temple offerings, because it is the price of blood.”
Matthew 27:7	Then, having taken counsel, they bought the potter’s field with it, as a burying place for sojourners.
Matthew 27:8	For this reason, that field is called Haceldama, that is, ‘The Field of Blood,’ even to this very day.
Matthew 27:9	Then what was spoken by the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled, saying, “And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of the one being appraised, whom they appraised before the sons of Israel,
Matthew 27:10	and they gave it for the potter’s field, just as the Lord appointed to me.”
Matthew 27:11	Now Jesus stood before the procurator, and the procurator questioned him, saying, “You are the king of the Jews?” Jesus said to him, “You are saying so.”
Matthew 27:12	And when he was accused by the leaders of the priests and the elders, he responded nothing.
Matthew 27:13	Then Pilate said to him, “Do you not hear how much testimony they speak against you?”
Matthew 27:14	And he did not respond any word to him, so that the procurator wondered greatly.
Matthew 27:15	Now on the solemn day, the procurator was accustomed to release to the people one prisoner, whomever they wished.
Matthew 27:16	And at that time, he had a notorious prisoner, who was called Barabbas.
Matthew 27:17	Therefore, having been gathered together, Pilate said to them, “Who is it that you want me to release to you: Barabbas, or Jesus, who is called Christ?”
Matthew 27:18	For he knew that it was out of envy they had handed him over.
Matthew 27:19	But as he was sitting in the place for the tribunal, his wife sent to him, saying: “It is nothing to you, and he is just. For I have experienced many things today through a vision for his sake.”
Matthew 27:20	But the leaders of the priests and the elders persuaded the people, so that they would ask for Barabbas, and so that Jesus would perish.
Matthew 27:21	Then, in response, the procurator said to them, “Which of the two do you want to be released to you?” But they said to him, “Barabbas.”
Matthew 27:22	Pilate said to them, “Then what shall I do about Jesus, who is called Christ?” They all said, “Let him be crucified.”
Matthew 27:23	The procurator said to them, “But what evil has he done?” But they cried out all the more, saying, “Let him be crucified.”
Matthew 27:24	Then Pilate, seeing that he was able to accomplish nothing, but that a greater tumult was occurring, taking water, washed his hands in the sight of the people, saying: “I am innocent of the blood of this just man. See to it yourselves.”
Matthew 27:25	And the entire people responded by saying, “May his blood be upon us and upon our children.”
Matthew 27:26	Then he released Barabbas to them. But Jesus, having been scourged, he handed over to them, so that he would be crucified.
Matthew 27:27	Then the soldiers of the procurator, taking Jesus up to the praetorium, gathered the entire cohort around him.
Matthew 27:28	And stripping him, they put a scarlet cloak around him.
Matthew 27:29	And plaiting a crown of thorns, they placed it on his head, with a reed in his right hand. And genuflecting before him, they mocked him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews.”
Matthew 27:30	And spitting on him, they took the reed and struck his head.
Matthew 27:31	And after they had mocked him, they stripped him of the cloak, and clothed him with his own garments, and they led him away to crucify him.
Matthew 27:32	But as they were going out, they came upon a man of Cyrene, named Simon, whom they compelled to take up his cross.
Matthew 27:33	And they arrived at the place which is called Golgotha, which is the place of Calvary.
Matthew 27:34	And they gave him wine to drink, mixed with gall. And when he had tasted it, he refused to drink it.
Matthew 27:35	Then, after they had crucified him, they divided his garments, casting lots, in order to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet, saying: “They divided my garments among them, and over my vestment they cast lots.”
Matthew 27:36	And sitting down, they observed him.
Matthew 27:37	And they set his accusation above his head, written as: THIS IS JESUS, KING OF THE JEWS.
Matthew 27:38	Then two robbers were crucified with him: one on the right and one on the left.
Matthew 27:39	But those passing by blasphemed him, shaking their heads,
Matthew 27:40	and saying: “Ah, so you would destroy the temple of God and in three days rebuild it! Save your own self. If you are the Son of God, descend from the cross.”
Matthew 27:41	And similarly, the leaders of the priests, with the scribes and the elders, mocking him, said:
Matthew 27:42	“He saved others; he cannot save himself. If he is the King of Israel, let him descend now from the cross, and we will believe in him.
Matthew 27:43	He trusted in God; so now, let God free him, if he wills him. For he said, ‘I am the Son of God.’ ”
Matthew 27:44	Then, the robbers who were crucified with him also reproached him with the very same thing.
Matthew 27:45	Now from the sixth hour, there was darkness over the entire earth, even until the ninth hour.
Matthew 27:46	And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried out with a loud voice, saying: “Eli, Eli, lamma sabacthani?” that is, “My God, My God, why have you forsaken me?”
Matthew 27:47	Then certain ones who were standing and listening there said, “This man calls upon Elijah.”
Matthew 27:48	And one of them, running quickly, took a sponge and filled it with vinegar, and he set it on a reed and he gave it to him to drink.
Matthew 27:49	Yet truly, the others said, “Wait. Let us see whether Elijah will come to free him.”
Matthew 27:50	Then Jesus, crying out again with a loud voice, gave up his life.
Matthew 27:51	And behold, the veil of the temple was torn into two parts, from top to bottom. And the earth was shaken, and the rocks were split apart.
Matthew 27:52	And the tombs were opened. And many bodies of the saints, which had been sleeping, arose.
Matthew 27:53	And going out from the tombs, after his resurrection, they went into the holy city, and they appeared to many.
Matthew 27:54	Now the centurion and those who were with him, guarding Jesus, having seen the earthquake and the things that were done, were very fearful, saying: “Truly, this was the Son of God.”
Matthew 27:55	And in that place, there were many women, at a distance, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering to him.
Matthew 27:56	Among these were Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
Matthew 27:57	Then, when evening had arrived, a certain wealthy man from Arimathea, named Joseph, arrived, who himself was also a disciple of Jesus.
Matthew 27:58	This man approached Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate ordered the body to be released.
Matthew 27:59	And Joseph, taking the body, wrapped it in a clean finely-woven linen cloth,
Matthew 27:60	and he placed it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out of a rock. And he rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb, and he went away.
Matthew 27:61	Now Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were there, sitting opposite the sepulcher.
Matthew 27:62	Then the next day, which is after the Preparation day, the leaders of the priests and the Pharisees went to Pilate together,
Matthew 27:63	saying: “Lord, we have remembered that that this seducer said, while he was still alive, ‘After three days, I will rise again.’
Matthew 27:64	Therefore, order the sepulcher to be guarded until the third day, lest perhaps his disciples may come and steal him, and say to the people, ‘He has risen from the dead.’ And this last error would be worse than the first.”
Matthew 27:65	Pilate said to them: “You have a guard. Go, guard it as you know how.”
Matthew 27:66	Then, going out, they secured the sepulcher with guards, sealing the stone.
Matthew 28:1	Now on the morning of the Sabbath, when it began to grow light on the first Sabbath, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to see the sepulcher.
Matthew 28:2	And behold, a great earthquake occurred. For an Angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and as he approached, he rolled back the stone and sat down on it.
Matthew 28:3	Now his appearance was like lightning, and his vestment was like snow.
Matthew 28:4	Then, out of fear of him, the guards were terrified, and they became like dead men.
Matthew 28:5	Then the Angel responded by saying to the women: “Do not be afraid. For I know that you are seeking Jesus, who was crucified.
Matthew 28:6	He is not here. For he has risen, just as he said. Come and see the place where the Lord was placed.
Matthew 28:7	And then, go quickly, and tell his disciples that he has risen. And behold, he will precede you to Galilee. There you shall see him. Lo, I have told you beforehand.”
Matthew 28:8	And they went out of the tomb quickly, with fear and in great joy, running to announce it to his disciples.
Matthew 28:9	And behold, Jesus met them, saying, “Hail.” But they drew near and took hold of his feet, and they adored him.
Matthew 28:10	Then Jesus said to them: “Do not be afraid. Go, announce it to my brothers, so that they may go to Galilee. There they shall see me.”
Matthew 28:11	And when they had departed, behold, some of the guards went into the city, and they reported to the leaders of the priests all that had happened.
Matthew 28:12	And gathering together with the elders, having taken counsel, they gave an abundant sum of money to the soldiers,
Matthew 28:13	saying: “Say that his disciples arrived at night and stole him away, while we were sleeping.
Matthew 28:14	And if the procurator hears about this, we will persuade him, and we will protect you.”
Matthew 28:15	Then, having accepted the money, they did as they were instructed. And this word has been spread among the Jews, even to this day.
Matthew 28:16	Now the eleven disciples went on to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had appointed them.
Matthew 28:17	And, seeing him, they worshipped him, but certain ones doubted.
Matthew 28:18	And Jesus, drawing near, spoke to them, saying: “All authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth.
Matthew 28:19	Therefore, go forth and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,
Matthew 28:20	teaching them to observe all that I have ever commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, even to the consummation of the age.”
Mark 1:1	The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
Mark 1:2	As it has been written by the prophet Isaiah: “Behold, I send my Angel before your face, who shall prepare your way before you.
Mark 1:3	The voice of one crying out in the desert: Prepare the way of the Lord; make straight his paths.”
Mark 1:4	John was in the desert, baptizing and preaching a baptism of repentance, as a remission of sins.
Mark 1:5	And there went out to him all the region of Judea and all those of Jerusalem, and they were baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.
Mark 1:6	And John was clothed with camel’s hair and with a leather belt around his waist. And he ate locusts and wild honey.
Mark 1:7	And he preached, saying: “One stronger than me comes after me. I am not worthy to reach down and loosen the laces of his shoes.
Mark 1:8	I have baptized you with water. Yet truly, he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”
Mark 1:9	And it happened that, in those days, Jesus arrived from Nazareth of Galilee. And he was baptized by John in the Jordan.
Mark 1:10	And immediately, upon ascending from the water, he saw the heavens opened and the Spirit, like a dove, descending, and remaining with him.
Mark 1:11	And there was a voice from heaven: “You are my beloved Son; in you I am well pleased.”
Mark 1:12	And immediately the Spirit prompted him into the desert.
Mark 1:13	And he was in the desert for forty days and forty nights. And he was tempted by Satan. And he was with the wild animals, and the Angels ministered to him.
Mark 1:14	Then, after John was handed over, Jesus went into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of God,
Mark 1:15	and saying: “For the time has been fulfilled and the kingdom of God has drawn near. Repent and believe in the Gospel.”
Mark 1:16	And passing by the shore of the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and his brother Andrew, casting nets into the sea, for they were fishermen.
Mark 1:17	And Jesus said to them, “Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.”
Mark 1:18	And at once abandoning their nets, they followed him.
Mark 1:19	And continuing on a little ways from there, he saw James of Zebedee and his brother John, and they were mending their nets in a boat.
Mark 1:20	And immediately he called them. And leaving behind their father Zebedee in the boat with his hired hands, they followed him.
Mark 1:21	And they entered into Capernaum. And entering into the synagogue promptly on the Sabbaths, he taught them.
Mark 1:22	And they were astonished over his doctrine. For he was teaching them as one who has authority, and not like the scribes.
Mark 1:23	And in their synagogue, there was a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out,
Mark 1:24	saying: “What are we to you, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are: the Holy One of God.”
Mark 1:25	And Jesus admonished him, saying, “Be silent, and depart from the man.”
Mark 1:26	And the unclean spirit, convulsing him and crying out with a loud voice, departed from him.
Mark 1:27	And they were all so amazed that they inquired among themselves, saying: “What is this? And what is this new doctrine? For with authority he commands even the unclean spirits, and they obey him.”
Mark 1:28	And his fame went out quickly, throughout the entire region of Galilee.
Mark 1:29	And soon after departing from the synagogue, they went into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
Mark 1:30	But the mother-in-law of Simon lay ill with a fever. And at once they told him about her.
Mark 1:31	And drawing near to her, he raised her up, taking her by the hand. And immediately the fever left her, and she ministered to them.
Mark 1:32	Then, when evening arrived, after the sun had set, they brought to him all who had maladies and those who had demons.
Mark 1:33	And the entire city was gathered together at the door.
Mark 1:34	And he healed many who were troubled with various illnesses. And he cast out many demons, but he would not permit them to speak, because they knew him.
Mark 1:35	And rising up very early, departing, he went out to a deserted place, and there he prayed.
Mark 1:36	And Simon, and those who were with him, followed after him.
Mark 1:37	And when they had found him, they said to him, “For everyone is seeking you.”
Mark 1:38	And he said to them: “Let us go into the neighboring towns and cities, so that I may preach there also. Indeed, it was for this reason that I came.”
Mark 1:39	And he was preaching in their synagogues and throughout all of Galilee, and casting out demons.
Mark 1:40	And a leper came to him, begging him. And kneeling down, he said to him, “If you are willing, you are able to cleanse me.”
Mark 1:41	Then Jesus, taking pity on him, reached out his hand. And touching him, he said to him: “I am willing. Be cleansed.”
Mark 1:42	And after he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed.
Mark 1:43	And he admonished him, and he promptly sent him away.
Mark 1:44	And he said to him: “See to it that you tell no one. But go and show yourself to the high priest, and offer for your cleansing that which Moses instructed, as a testimony for them.”
Mark 1:45	But having departed, he began to preach and to disseminate the word, so that he was no longer able to openly enter a city, but had to remain outside, in deserted places. And they were gathered to him from every direction.
Mark 2:1	And after some days, he again entered into Capernaum.
Mark 2:2	And it was heard that he was in the house. And so many gathered that there was no room left, not even at the door. And he spoke the word to them.
Mark 2:3	And they came to him, bringing a paralytic, who was being carried by four men.
Mark 2:4	And when they were not able to present him to him because of the crowd, they uncovered the roof where he was. And opening it, they lowered down the stretcher on which the paralytic was lying.
Mark 2:5	Then, when Jesus had seen their faith, he said to the paralytic, “Son, your sins are forgiven you.”
Mark 2:6	But some of the scribes were sitting in that place and thinking in their hearts:
Mark 2:7	“Why is this man speaking in this way? He is blaspheming. Who can forgive sins, but God alone?”
Mark 2:8	At once, Jesus, realizing in his spirit that they were thinking this within themselves, said to them: “Why are you thinking these things in your hearts?
Mark 2:9	Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven you,’ or to say, ‘Rise up, take up your stretcher, and walk?’
Mark 2:10	But so that you may know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins,” he said to the paralytic:
Mark 2:11	“I say to you: Rise up, take up your stretcher, and go into your house.”
Mark 2:12	And immediately he got up, and lifting up his stretcher, he went away in the sight of them all, so that they all wondered. And they honored God, by saying, “We have never seen anything like this.”
Mark 2:13	And he departed again to the sea. And the entire crowd came to him, and he taught them.
Mark 2:14	And as he was passing by, he saw Levi of Alphaeus, sitting at the customs office. And he said to him, “Follow me.” And rising up, he followed him.
Mark 2:15	And it happened that, as he sat at table in his house, many tax collectors and sinners sat at table together with Jesus and his disciples. For those who followed him were many.
Mark 2:16	And the scribes and the Pharisees, seeing that he ate with tax collectors and sinners, said to his disciples, “Why does your Teacher eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
Mark 2:17	Jesus, having heard this, said to them: “The healthy have no need of a doctor, but those who have maladies do. For I came not to call the just, but sinners.”
Mark 2:18	And the disciples of John, and the Pharisees, were fasting. And they arrived and said to him, “Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples do not fast?”
Mark 2:19	And Jesus said to them: “How can the sons of the wedding fast while the groom is still with them? During whatever time they have the groom with them, they are not able to fast.
Mark 2:20	But the days will arrive when the groom will be taken away from them, and then they shall fast, in those days.
Mark 2:21	No one sews a patch of new cloth onto an old garment. Otherwise, the new addition pulls away from the old, and the tear becomes worse.
Mark 2:22	And no one puts new wine into old wineskins. Otherwise, the wine will burst the wineskins, and the wine will pour out, and the wineskins will be lost. Instead, new wine must be put into new wineskins.”
Mark 2:23	And again, while the Lord was walking through the ripe grain on the Sabbath, his disciples, as they advanced, began to separate the ears of grains.
Mark 2:24	But the Pharisees said to him, “Behold, why are they doing what is not lawful on the Sabbaths?”
Mark 2:25	And he said to them: “Have you never read what David did, when he had need and was hungry, both he and those who were with him?
Mark 2:26	How he went into the house of God, under the high priest Abiathar, and ate the bread of the Presence, which it was not lawful to eat, except for the priests, and how he gave it to those who were with him?”
Mark 2:27	And he said to them: “The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.
Mark 2:28	And so, the Son of man is Lord, even of the Sabbath.”
Mark 3:1	And again, he entered into the synagogue. And there was a man there who had a withered hand.
Mark 3:2	And they observed him, to see if he would cure on the Sabbaths, so that they might accuse him.
Mark 3:3	And he said to the man who had the withered hand, “Stand up in the middle.”
Mark 3:4	And he said to them: “Is it lawful to do good on the Sabbaths, or to do evil, to give health to a life, or to destroy?” But they remained silent.
Mark 3:5	And looking around at them with anger, being very saddened over the blindness of their hearts, he said to the man, “Extend your hand.” And he extended it, and his hand was restored to him.
Mark 3:6	Then the Pharisees, going out, immediately took counsel with the Herodians against him, as to how they might destroy him.
Mark 3:7	But Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea. And a great crowd followed him from Galilee and Judea,
Mark 3:8	and from Jerusalem, and from Idumea and across the Jordan. And those around Tyre and Sidon, upon hearing what he was doing, came to him in a great multitude.
Mark 3:9	And he told his disciples that a small boat would be useful to him, because of the crowd, lest they press upon him.
Mark 3:10	For he healed so many, that as many of them as had wounds would rush toward him in order to touch him.
Mark 3:11	And the unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell prostrate before him. And they cried out, saying,
Mark 3:12	“You are the Son of God.” And he strongly admonished them, lest they make him known.
Mark 3:13	And ascending onto a mountain, he called to himself those whom he willed, and they came to him.
Mark 3:14	And he acted so that the twelve would be with him, and so that he might send them out to preach.
Mark 3:15	And he gave them authority to cure infirmities, and to cast out demons:
Mark 3:16	and he imposed on Simon the name Peter;
Mark 3:17	and also he imposed on James of Zebedee, and John the brother of James, the name ‘Boanerges,’ that is, ‘Sons of Thunder;’
Mark 3:18	and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James of Alphaeus, and Thaddeus, and Simon the Canaanite,
Mark 3:19	and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.
Mark 3:20	And they went to a house, and the crowd gathered together again, so much so that they were not even able to eat bread.
Mark 3:21	And when his own had heard of it, they went out to take hold of him. For they said: “Because he has gone mad.”
Mark 3:22	And the scribes who had descended from Jerusalem said, “Because he has Beelzebub, and because by the prince of demons does he cast out demons.”
Mark 3:23	And having called them together, he spoke to them in parables: “How can Satan cast out Satan?
Mark 3:24	For if a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom is not able to stand.
Mark 3:25	And if a house is divided against itself, that house is not able to stand.
Mark 3:26	And if Satan has risen up against himself, he would be divided, and he would not be able to stand; instead he reaches the end.
Mark 3:27	No one is able to plunder the goods of a strong man, having entered into the house, unless he first binds the strong man, and then he shall plunder his house.
Mark 3:28	Amen I say to you, that all sins will be forgiven the sons of men, and the blasphemies by which they will have blasphemed.
Mark 3:29	But he who will have blasphemed against the Holy Spirit shall not have forgiveness in eternity; instead he shall be guilty of an eternal offense.”
Mark 3:30	For they said: “He has an unclean spirit.”
Mark 3:31	And his mother and brothers arrived. And standing outside, they sent to him, calling him.
Mark 3:32	And the crowd was sitting around him. And they said to him, “Behold, your mother and your brothers are outside, seeking you.”
Mark 3:33	And responding to them, he said, “Who is my mother and my brothers?”
Mark 3:34	And looking around at those who were sitting all around him, he said: “Behold, my mother and my brothers.
Mark 3:35	For whoever has done the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister and mother.”
Mark 4:1	And again, he began to teach by the sea. And a great crowd was gathered to him, so much so that, climbing into a boat, he was seated on the sea. And the entire crowd was on the land along the sea.
Mark 4:2	And he taught them many things in parables, and he said to them, in his doctrine:
Mark 4:3	“Listen. Behold, the sower went out to sow.
Mark 4:4	And while he was sowing, some fell along the way, and the birds of the air came and ate it.
Mark 4:5	Yet truly, others fell upon stony ground, where it did not have much soil. And it rose up quickly, because it had no depth of soil.
Mark 4:6	And when the sun was risen, it was scorched. And because it had no root, it withered away.
Mark 4:7	And some fell among thorns. And the thorns grew up and suffocated it, and it did not produce fruit.
Mark 4:8	And some fell on good soil. And it brought forth fruit that grew up, and increased, and yielded: some thirty, some sixty, and some one hundred.”
Mark 4:9	And he said, “Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Mark 4:10	And when he was alone, the twelve, who were with him, questioned him about the parable.
Mark 4:11	And he said to them: “To you, it has been given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God. But to those who are outside, everything is presented in parables:
Mark 4:12	‘so that, seeing, they may see, and not perceive; and hearing, they may hear, and not understand; lest at any time they may be converted, and their sins would be forgiven them.’ ”
Mark 4:13	And he said to them: “Do you not understand this parable? And so, how will you understand all the parables?
Mark 4:14	He who sows, sows the word.
Mark 4:15	Now there are those who are along the way, where the word is sown. And when they have heard it, Satan quickly comes and takes away the word, which was sown in their hearts.
Mark 4:16	And similarly, there are those who were sown upon stony ground. These, when they have heard the word, immediately accept it with gladness.
Mark 4:17	But they have no root in themselves, and so they are for a limited time. And when next tribulation and persecution arises because of the word, they quickly fall away.
Mark 4:18	And there are others who are sown among thorns. These are those who hear the word,
Mark 4:19	but worldly tasks, and the deception of riches, and desires about other things enter in and suffocate the word, and it is effectively without fruit.
Mark 4:20	And there are those who are sown upon good soil, who hear the word and accept it; and these bear fruit: some thirty, some sixty, and some one hundred.”
Mark 4:21	And he said to them: “Would someone enter with a lamp in order to place it under a basket or under a bed? Would it not be placed upon a lampstand?
Mark 4:22	For there is nothing hidden that will not be revealed. Neither was anything done in secret, except that it may be made public.
Mark 4:23	If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Mark 4:24	And he said to them: “Consider what you hear. With whatever measure you have measured out, it shall be measured back to you, and more shall be added to you.
Mark 4:25	For whoever has, to him it shall be given. And whoever has not, from him even what he has shall be taken away.”
Mark 4:26	And he said: “The kingdom of God is like this: it is as if a man were to cast seed on the land.
Mark 4:27	And he sleeps and he arises, night and day. And the seed germinates and grows, though he does not know it.
Mark 4:28	For the earth bears fruit readily: first the plant, then the ear, next the full grain in the ear.
Mark 4:29	And when the fruit has been produced, immediately he sends out the sickle, because the harvest has arrived.”
Mark 4:30	And he said: “To what should we compare the kingdom of God? Or to what parable should we compare it?
Mark 4:31	It is like a grain of mustard seed which, when it has been sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds which are in the earth.
Mark 4:32	And when it is sown, it grows up and becomes greater than all the plants, and it produces great branches, so much so that the birds of the air are able to live under its shadow.”
Mark 4:33	And with many such parables he spoke the word to them, as much as they were able to hear.
Mark 4:34	But he did not speak to them without a parable. Yet separately, he explained all things to his disciples.
Mark 4:35	And on that day, when evening had arrived, he said to them, “Let us cross over.”
Mark 4:36	And dismissing the crowd, they brought him, so that he was in one boat, and other boats were with him.
Mark 4:37	And a great wind storm occurred, and the waves broke over the boat, so that the boat was being filled.
Mark 4:38	And he was in the stern of the boat, sleeping on a pillow. And they woke him and said to him, “Teacher, does it not concern you that we are perishing?”
Mark 4:39	And rising up, he rebuked the wind, and he said to the sea: “Silence. Be stilled.” And the wind ceased. And a great tranquility occurred.
Mark 4:40	And he said to them: “Why are you afraid? Do you still lack faith?”
Mark 4:41	And they were struck with a great fear. And they said to one another, “Who do you think this is, that both wind and sea obey him?”
Mark 5:1	And they went across the strait of the sea into the region of the Gerasenes.
Mark 5:2	And as he was departing from the boat, he was immediately met, from among the tombs, by a man with an unclean spirit,
Mark 5:3	who had his dwelling place with the tombs; neither had anyone been able to bind him, even with chains.
Mark 5:4	For having been bound often with shackles and chains, he had broken the chains and smashed the shackles; and no one had been able to tame him.
Mark 5:5	And he was always, day and night, among the tombs, or in the mountains, crying out and cutting himself with stones.
Mark 5:6	And seeing Jesus from afar, he ran and adored him.
Mark 5:7	And crying out with a loud voice, he said: “What am I to you, Jesus, the Son of the Most High God? I beseech you by God, that you not torment me.”
Mark 5:8	For he said to him, “Depart from the man, you unclean spirit.”
Mark 5:9	And he questioned him: “What is your name?” And he said to him, “My name is Legion, for we are many.”
Mark 5:10	And he entreated him greatly, so that he would not expel him from the region.
Mark 5:11	And in that place, near the mountain, there was a great herd of swine, feeding.
Mark 5:12	And the spirits entreated him, saying: “Send us into the swine, so that we may enter into them.”
Mark 5:13	And Jesus promptly gave them permission. And the unclean spirits, departing, entered into the swine. And the herd of about two thousand rushed down with great force into the sea, and they were drowned in the sea.
Mark 5:14	Then those who pastured them fled, and they reported it in the city and in the countryside. And they all went out to see what was happening.
Mark 5:15	And they came to Jesus. And they saw the man who had been troubled by the demon, sitting, clothed and with a sane mind, and they were afraid.
Mark 5:16	And those who had seen it explained to them how he had dealt with the man who had the demon, and about the swine.
Mark 5:17	And they began to petition him, so that he would withdraw from their borders.
Mark 5:18	And as he was climbing into the boat, the man who had been troubled by the demons began to beg him, so that he might be with him.
Mark 5:19	And he did not permit him, but he said to him, “Go to your own people, in your own house, and announce to them how great are the things that Lord has done for you, and how he has taken pity on you.”
Mark 5:20	And he went away and began to preach in the Ten Cities, how great were the things that Jesus had done for him. And everyone wondered.
Mark 5:21	And when Jesus had crossed in the boat, over the strait again, a great crowd came together before him. And he was near the sea.
Mark 5:22	And one of the rulers of the synagogue, named Jairus, approached. And seeing him, he fell prostrate at his feet.
Mark 5:23	And he beseeched him greatly, saying: “For my daughter is near the end. Come and lay your hand on her, so that she may be healthy and may live.”
Mark 5:24	And he went with him. And a great crowd followed him, and they pressed upon him.
Mark 5:25	And there was a woman who had a flow of blood for twelve years.
Mark 5:26	And she had endured much from several physicians, and she had spent everything she owned with no benefit at all, but instead she became worse.
Mark 5:27	Then, when she had heard of Jesus, she approached through the crowd behind him, and she touched his garment.
Mark 5:28	For she said: “Because if I touch even his garment, I will be saved.”
Mark 5:29	And immediately, the source of her bleeding was dried up, and she sensed in her body that she had been healed from the wound.
Mark 5:30	And immediately Jesus, realizing within himself that power that had gone out from him, turning to the crowd, said, “Who touched my garments?”
Mark 5:31	And his disciples said to him, “You see that the crowd presses around you, and yet you say, ‘Who touched me?’ ”
Mark 5:32	And he looked around to see the woman who had done this.
Mark 5:33	Yet truly, the woman, in fear and trembling, knowing what had happened within her, went and fell prostrate before him, and she told him the whole truth.
Mark 5:34	And he said to her: “Daughter, your faith has saved you. Go in peace, and be healed from your wound.”
Mark 5:35	While he was still speaking, they arrived from the ruler of the synagogue, saying: “Your daughter is dead. Why trouble the Teacher any further?”
Mark 5:36	But Jesus, having heard the word that was spoken, said to the ruler of the synagogue: “Do not be afraid. You need only believe.”
Mark 5:37	And he would not permit anyone to follow him, except Peter, and James, and John the brother of James.
Mark 5:38	And they went to the house of the ruler of the synagogue. And he saw a tumult, and weeping, and much wailing.
Mark 5:39	And entering, he said to them: “Why are you disturbed and weeping? The girl is not dead, but is asleep.”
Mark 5:40	And they derided him. Yet truly, having put them all out, he took the father and mother of the girl, and those who were with him, and he entered to where the girl was lying.
Mark 5:41	And taking the girl by the hand, he said to her, “Talitha koumi,” which means, “Little girl, (I say to you) arise.
Mark 5:42	And immediately the young girl rose up and walked. Now she was twelve years old. And they were suddenly struck with a great astonishment.
Mark 5:43	And he instructed them sternly, so that no one would know about it. And he told them to give her something to eat.
Mark 6:1	And departing from there, he went away to his own country; and his disciples followed him.
Mark 6:2	And when the Sabbath arrived, he began to teach in the synagogue. And many, upon hearing him, were amazed at his doctrine, saying: “Where did this one get all these things?” and, “What is this wisdom, which has been given to him?” and, “Such powerful deeds, which are wrought by his hands!”
Mark 6:3	“Is this not the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James, and Joseph, and Jude, and Simon? Are not his sisters also here with us?” And they took great offense at him.
Mark 6:4	And Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country, and in his own house, and among his own kindred.”
Mark 6:5	And he was not able to perform any miracles there, except that he cured a few of the infirm by laying his hands on them.
Mark 6:6	And he wondered, because of their unbelief, and he traveled around in the villages, teaching.
Mark 6:7	And he called the twelve. And he began to send them out in twos, and he gave them authority over unclean spirits.
Mark 6:8	And he instructed them not to take anything for the journey, except a staff: no traveling bag, no bread, and no money belt,
Mark 6:9	but to wear sandals, and not to wear two tunics.
Mark 6:10	And he said to them: “Whenever you have entered into a house, stay there until you depart from that place.
Mark 6:11	And whoever will neither receive you, nor listen to you, as you go away from there, shake off the dust from your feet as a testimony against them.”
Mark 6:12	And going out, they were preaching, so that people would repent.
Mark 6:13	And they cast out many demons, and they anointed many of the sick with oil and healed them.
Mark 6:14	And king Herod heard of it, (for his name had become well-known) and he said: “John the Baptist has risen again from the dead, and because of this, miracles are at work in him.”
Mark 6:15	But others were saying, “Because it is Elijah.” Still others were saying, “Because he is a prophet, like one of the prophets.”
Mark 6:16	When Herod had heard it, he said, “John whom I beheaded, the same has risen again from the dead.”
Mark 6:17	For Herod himself had sent to capture John, and had chained him in prison, because of Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip; for he had married her.
Mark 6:18	For John was saying to Herod, “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife.”
Mark 6:19	Now Herodias was devising treachery against him; and she wanted to kill him, but she was unable.
Mark 6:20	For Herod was apprehensive of John, knowing him to be a just and holy man, and so he guarded him. And he heard that he was accomplishing many things, and so he listened to him willingly.
Mark 6:21	And when an opportune time had arrived, Herod held a feast on his birthday, with the leaders, and the tribunes, and the first rulers of Galilee.
Mark 6:22	And when the daughter of the same Herodias had entered, and danced, and pleased Herod, along with those who were at table with him, the king said to the girl, “Request from me whatever you want, and I will give it to you.”
Mark 6:23	And he swore to her, “Anything that you request, I will give to you, even up to half my kingdom.”
Mark 6:24	And when she had gone out, she said to her mother, “What shall I request?” But her mother said, “The head of John the Baptist.”
Mark 6:25	And immediately, when she had entered with haste to the king, she petitioned him, saying: “I want you to give me at once the head of John the Baptist on a platter.”
Mark 6:26	And the king was greatly saddened. But because of his oath, and because of those who were sitting with him at table, he was not willing to disappoint her.
Mark 6:27	So, having sent an executioner, he instructed that his head be brought on a platter.
Mark 6:28	And he beheaded him in prison, and he brought his head on a platter. And he gave it to the girl, and the girl gave it her mother.
Mark 6:29	When his disciples heard about it, they came and took his body, and they placed it in a tomb.
Mark 6:30	And the Apostles, returning to Jesus, reported to him everything that they had done and taught.
Mark 6:31	And he said to them, “Go out alone, into a deserted place, and rest for a little while.” For there were so many who were coming and going, that they did not even have time to eat.
Mark 6:32	And climbing into a boat, they went away to a deserted place alone.
Mark 6:33	And they saw them going away, and many knew about it. And together they ran by foot from all the cities, and they arrived before them.
Mark 6:34	And Jesus, going out, saw a great multitude. And he took pity on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd, and he began to teach them many things.
Mark 6:35	And when many hours had now passed, his disciples drew near to him, saying: “This is a deserted place, and the hour is now late.
Mark 6:36	Send them away, so that by going out to nearby villages and towns, they might buy provisions for themselves to eat.”
Mark 6:37	And responding, he said to them, “Give them something to eat yourselves.” And they said to him, “Let us go out and buy bread for two hundred denarii, and then we will give them something to eat.”
Mark 6:38	And he said to them: “How many loaves do you have? Go and see.” And when they had found out, they said, “Five, and two fish.”
Mark 6:39	And he instructed them to make them all sit down in groups on the green grass.
Mark 6:40	And they sat down in divisions by hundreds and by fifties.
Mark 6:41	And having received the five loaves and the two fish, gazing up to heaven, he blessed and broke the bread, and he gave it to his disciples to set before them. And the two fish he divided among them all.
Mark 6:42	And they all ate and were satisfied.
Mark 6:43	And they brought together the remainder: twelve baskets full of fragments and of fish.
Mark 6:44	Now those who ate were five thousand men.
Mark 6:45	And without delay he urged his disciples to climb into the boat, so that they might precede him across the sea to Bethsaida, while he dismissed the people.
Mark 6:46	And when he had dismissed them, he went to the mountain to pray.
Mark 6:47	And when it was late, the boat was in the midst of the sea, and he was alone on the land.
Mark 6:48	And seeing them struggling to row, (for the wind was against them,) and about the fourth watch of the night, he came to them, walking upon the sea. And he intended to pass by them.
Mark 6:49	But when they saw him walking upon the sea, they thought it was an apparition, and they cried out.
Mark 6:50	For they all saw him, and they were very disturbed. And immediately he spoke with them, and he said to them: “Be strengthened in faith. It is I. Do not be afraid.”
Mark 6:51	And he climbed into the boat with them, and the wind ceased. And they became even more astonished within themselves.
Mark 6:52	For they did not understand about the bread. For their heart had been blinded.
Mark 6:53	And when they had crossed over, they arrived in the land of Genesaret, and they reached the shore.
Mark 6:54	And when they had disembarked from the boat, the people immediately recognized him.
Mark 6:55	And running throughout that entire region, they began to carry on beds those who had maladies, to where they heard that he would be.
Mark 6:56	And in whichever place he entered, in towns or villages or cities, they placed the infirm in the main streets, and they pleaded with him that they might touch even the hem of his garment. And as many as touched him were made healthy.
Mark 7:1	And the Pharisees and some of the scribes, arriving from Jerusalem, gathered together before him.
Mark 7:2	And when they had seen certain ones from his disciples eating bread with common hands, that is, with unwashed hands, they disparaged them.
Mark 7:3	For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, do not eat without repeatedly washing their hands, holding to the tradition of the elders.
Mark 7:4	And when returning from the market, unless they wash, they do not eat. And there are many other things which have been handed down to them to observe: the washings of cups, and pitchers, and bronze containers, and beds.
Mark 7:5	And so the Pharisees and the scribes questioned him: “Why do your disciples not walk according to the tradition of the elders, but they eat bread with common hands?”
Mark 7:6	But in response, he said to them: “So well did Isaiah prophesy about you hypocrites, just as it has been written: ‘This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
Mark 7:7	And in vain do they worship me, teaching the doctrines and precepts of men.’
Mark 7:8	For abandoning the commandment of God, you hold to the tradition of men, to the washing of pitchers and cups. And you do many other things similar to these.”
Mark 7:9	And he said to them: “You effectively nullify the precept of God, so that you may observe your own tradition.
Mark 7:10	For Moses said: ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘Whoever will have cursed father or mother, let him die a death.’
Mark 7:11	But you say, ‘If a man will have said to his father or mother: Korban, (which is a gift) whatever is from me will be to your benefit,’
Mark 7:12	then you do not release him to do anything for his father or mother,
Mark 7:13	rescinding the word of God through your tradition, which you have handed down. And you do many other similar things in this way.”
Mark 7:14	And again, calling the crowd to him, he said to them: “Listen to me, all of you, and understand.
Mark 7:15	There is nothing from outside a man which, by entering into him, is able to defile him. But the things which procede from a man, these are what pollute a man.
Mark 7:16	Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Mark 7:17	And when he had entered into the house, away from the crowd, his disciples questioned him about the parable.
Mark 7:18	And he said to them: “So, are you also without prudence? Do you not understand that everything entering to a man from outside is not able to pollute him?
Mark 7:19	For it does not enter into his heart, but into the gut, and it exits into the sewer, purging all foods.”
Mark 7:20	“But,” he said “the things which go out from a man, these pollute a man.
Mark 7:21	For from within, from the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders,
Mark 7:22	thefts, avarice, wickedness, deceitfulness, homosexuality, an evil eye, blasphemy, self-exaltation, foolishness.
Mark 7:23	All these evils procede from within and pollute a man.”
Mark 7:24	And rising up, he went from there to the area of Tyre and Sidon. And entering into a house, he intended no one to know about it, but he was not able to remain hidden.
Mark 7:25	For a woman whose daughter had an unclean spirit, as soon as she heard about him, entered and fell prostrate at his feet.
Mark 7:26	For the woman was a Gentile, by birth a Syro-Phoenician. And she petitioned him, so that he would cast the demon from her daughter.
Mark 7:27	And he said to her: “First allow the sons to have their fill. For it is not good to take away the bread of the sons and throw it to the dogs.”
Mark 7:28	But she responded by saying to him: “Certainly, Lord. Yet the young dogs also eat, under the table, from the crumbs of the children.”
Mark 7:29	And he said to her, “Because of this saying, go; the demon has gone out of your daughter.”
Mark 7:30	And when she had gone to her house, she found the girl lying on the bed; and the demon had gone away.
Mark 7:31	And again, departing from the borders of Tyre, he went by way of Sidon to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the area of the Ten Cities.
Mark 7:32	And they brought someone who was deaf and mute to him. And they begged him, so that he would lay his hand upon him.
Mark 7:33	And taking him away from the crowd, he put his fingers into his ears; and spitting, he touched his tongue.
Mark 7:34	And gazing up to heaven, he groaned and said to him: “Ephphatha,” which is, “Be opened.”
Mark 7:35	And immediately his ears were opened, and the impediment of his tongue was released, and he spoke correctly.
Mark 7:36	And he instructed them not to tell anyone. But as much as he instructed them, so much more did they preach about it.
Mark 7:37	And so much more did they wonder, saying: “He has done all things well. He has caused both the deaf to hear and the mute to speak.”
Mark 8:1	In those days, again, when there was a great crowd, and they did not have anything to eat, calling together his disciples, he said to them:
Mark 8:2	“I have compassion for the multitude, because, behold, they have persevered with me now for three days, and they do not have anything to eat.
Mark 8:3	And if I were to send them away fasting to their home, they might faint on the way.” For some of them came from far away.
Mark 8:4	And his disciples answered him, “From where would anyone be able to obtain enough bread for them in the wilderness?”
Mark 8:5	And he questioned them, “How many loaves do you have?” And they said, “Seven.”
Mark 8:6	And he instructed the crowd to sit down to eat on the ground. And taking the seven loaves, giving thanks, he broke and gave it to his disciples in order to place before them. And they placed these before the crowd.
Mark 8:7	And they had a few small fish. And he blessed them, and he ordered them to be placed before them.
Mark 8:8	And they ate and were satisfied. And they took up what had been leftover from the fragments: seven baskets.
Mark 8:9	And those who ate were about four thousand. And he dismissed them.
Mark 8:10	And promptly climbing into a boat with his disciples, he went into the parts of Dalmanutha.
Mark 8:11	And the Pharisees went out and began to contend with him, seeking from him a sign from heaven, testing him.
Mark 8:12	And sighing deeply in spirit, he said: “Why does this generation seek a sign? Amen, I say to you, if only a sign will be given to this generation!”
Mark 8:13	And sending them away, he climbed into the boat again, and he went away across the sea.
Mark 8:14	And they forgot to take bread. And they did not have any with them in the boat, except one loaf.
Mark 8:15	And he instructed them, saying: “Consider and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the leaven of Herod.”
Mark 8:16	And they discussed this with one another, saying, “For we have no bread.”
Mark 8:17	And Jesus, knowing this, said to them: “Why do you consider that it is because you have no bread? Do you not yet know or understand? Do you still have blindness in your heart?
Mark 8:18	Having eyes, do you not see? And having ears, do you not hear? Do you not remember,
Mark 8:19	when I broke the five loves among the five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments you took up?” They said to him, “Twelve.”
Mark 8:20	“And when the seven loaves were among the four thousand, how many baskets of fragments did you take up?” And they said to him, “Seven.”
Mark 8:21	And he said to them, “How is it that you do not yet understand?”
Mark 8:22	And they went to Bethsaida. And they brought a blind man to him. And they petitioned him, so that he would touch him.
Mark 8:23	And taking the blind man by the hand, he led him beyond the village. And putting spit on his eyes, laying his hands on him, he asked him if he could see anything.
Mark 8:24	And looking up, he said, “I see men but they are like walking trees.”
Mark 8:25	Next he placed his hands again over his eyes, and he began to see. And he was restored, so that he could see everything clearly.
Mark 8:26	And he sent him to his house, saying, “Go into your own house, and if you enter into the town, tell no one.”
Mark 8:27	And Jesus departed with his disciples into the towns of Caesarea Philippi. And on the way, he questioned his disciples, saying to them, “Who do men say that I am?”
Mark 8:28	And they answered him by saying: “John the Baptist, others Elijah, still others perhaps one of the prophets.”
Mark 8:29	Then he said to them, “Yet truly, who do you say that I am?” Peter responded by saying to him, “You are the Christ.”
Mark 8:30	And he admonished them, not to tell anyone about him.
Mark 8:31	And he began to teach them that the Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, and by the high priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again.
Mark 8:32	And he spoke the word openly. And Peter, taking him aside, began to correct him.
Mark 8:33	And turning away and looking at his disciples, he admonished Peter, saying, “Get behind me, Satan, for you do not prefer the things that are of God, but the things that are of men.”
Mark 8:34	And calling together the crowd with his disciples, he said to them, “If anyone chooses to follow me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
Mark 8:35	For whoever will have chosen to save his life, will lose it. But whoever will have lost his life, for my sake and for the Gospel, shall save it.
Mark 8:36	For how does it benefit a man, if he gains the whole world, and yet causes harm to his soul?
Mark 8:37	Or, what will a man give in exchange for his soul?
Mark 8:38	For whoever has been ashamed of me and of my words, among this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of man also will be ashamed of him, when he will arrive in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.”
Mark 9:1	And he said to them, “Amen I say to you, that there are some among those standing here who shall not taste death until they see the kingdom of God arriving in power.”
Mark 9:2	And after six days, Jesus took with him Peter, and James, and John; and he led them separately to a lofty mountain alone; and he was transfigured before them.
Mark 9:3	And his vestments became radiant and exceedingly white like snow, with such a brilliance as no fuller on earth is able to achieve.
Mark 9:4	And there appeared to them Elijah with Moses; and they were speaking with Jesus.
Mark 9:5	And in response, Peter said to Jesus: “Master, it is good for us to be here. And so let us make three tabernacles, one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
Mark 9:6	For he did not know what he was saying. For they were overwhelmed by fear.
Mark 9:7	And there was a cloud overshadowing them. And a voice came from the cloud, saying: “This is my most beloved Son. Listen to him.”
Mark 9:8	And immediately, looking around, they no longer saw anyone, except Jesus alone with them.
Mark 9:9	And as they were descending from the mountain, he instructed them not to relate to anyone what they had seen, until after the Son of man will have risen again from the dead.
Mark 9:10	And they kept the word to themselves, arguing about what “after he will have risen from the dead” might mean.
Mark 9:11	And they questioned him, saying: “Then why do the Pharisees and the scribes say that Elijah must arrive first?”
Mark 9:12	And in response, he said to them: “Elijah, when he will arrive first, shall restore all things. And in the manner that it has been written about the Son of man, so must he suffer many things and be condemned.
Mark 9:13	But I say to you, that Elijah also has arrived, (and they have done to him whatever they wanted) just as it has been written about him.”
Mark 9:14	And approaching his disciples, he saw a great crowd surrounding them, and the scribes were arguing with them.
Mark 9:15	And soon all the people, seeing Jesus, were astonished and struck with fear, and hurrying to him, they greeted him.
Mark 9:16	And he questioned them, “What are you arguing about among yourselves?”
Mark 9:17	And one from the crowd responded by saying: “Teacher, I have brought to you my son, who has a mute spirit.
Mark 9:18	And whenever it takes hold of him, it throws him down, and he foams and gnashes with his teeth, and he becomes unconscious. And I asked your disciples to cast him out, and they could not.”
Mark 9:19	And answering them, he said: “O unbelieving generation, how long must I be with you? How long shall I endure you? Bring him to me.”
Mark 9:20	And they brought him. And when he had seen him, immediately the spirit disturbed him. And having been thrown to the ground, he rolled around foaming.
Mark 9:21	And he questioned his father, “How long has this been happening to him?” But he said: “From infancy.
Mark 9:22	And often it casts him into fire or into water, in order to destroy him. But if you are able to do anything, help us and take pity on us.”
Mark 9:23	But Jesus said to him, “If you are able to believe: all things are possible to one who believes.”
Mark 9:24	And immediately the father of the boy, crying out with tears, said: “I do believe, Lord. Help my unbelief.”
Mark 9:25	And when Jesus saw the crowd rushing together, he admonished the unclean spirit, saying to him, “Deaf and mute spirit, I command you, leave him; and do not enter into him anymore.”
Mark 9:26	And crying out, and convulsing him greatly, he departed from him. And he became like one who is dead, so much so that many said, “He is dead.”
Mark 9:27	But Jesus, taking him by the hand, lifted him up. And he arose.
Mark 9:28	And when he had entered into the house, his disciples questioned him privately, “Why were we unable to cast him out?”
Mark 9:29	And he said to them, “This kind is able to be expelled by nothing other than prayer and fasting.”
Mark 9:30	And setting out from there, they passed through Galilee. And he intended that no one know about it.
Mark 9:31	Then he taught his disciples, and he said to them, “For the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men, and they will kill him, and having been killed, on the third day he will rise again.”
Mark 9:32	But they did not understand the word. And they were afraid to question him.
Mark 9:33	And they went to Capernaum. And when they were in the house, he questioned them, “What did you discuss on the way?”
Mark 9:34	But they were silent. For indeed, on the way, they had disputed among themselves as to which of them was greater.
Mark 9:35	And sitting down, he called the twelve, and he said to them, “If anyone wants to be first, he shall be the last of all and the minister of all.”
Mark 9:36	And taking a child, he set him in their midst. And when he had embraced him, he said to them:
Mark 9:37	“Whoever receives one such child in my name, receives me. And whoever receives me, receives not me, but him who sent me.”
Mark 9:38	John responded to him by saying, “Teacher, we saw someone casting out demons in your name; he does not follow us, and so we prohibited him.”
Mark 9:39	But Jesus said: “Do not prohibit him. For there is no one who can act with virtue in my name and soon speak evil about me.
Mark 9:40	For whoever is not against you is for you.
Mark 9:41	For whoever, in my name, will give you a cup of water to drink, because you belong to Christ: Amen I say to you, he shall not lose his reward.
Mark 9:42	And whoever will have scandalized one of these little ones who believe in me: it would be better for him if a great millstone were placed around his neck and he were thrown into the sea.
Mark 9:43	And if your hand causes you to sin, cut it off: it is better for you to enter into life disabled, than having two hands to go into Hell, into the unquenchable fire,
Mark 9:44	where their worm does not die, and the fire is not extinguished.
Mark 9:45	But if your foot causes you to sin, chop it off: it is better for you to enter into eternal life lame, than having two feet to be cast into the Hell of unquenchable fire,
Mark 9:46	where their worm does not die, and the fire is not extinguished.
Mark 9:47	But if your eye causes you to sin, pluck it out: it is better for you to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into the Hell of fire,
Mark 9:48	where their worm does not die, and the fire is not extinguished.
Mark 9:49	For all shall be salted with fire, and every victim shall be salted with salt.
Mark 9:50	Salt is good: but if the salt has become bland, with what will you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace among yourselves.”
Mark 10:1	And rising up, he went from there into the area of Judea beyond the Jordan. And again, the crowd came together before him. And just as he was accustomed to do, again he taught them.
Mark 10:2	And approaching, the Pharisees questioned him, testing him: “Is it lawful for a man to dismiss his wife?”
Mark 10:3	But in response, he said to them, “What did Moses instruct you?”
Mark 10:4	And they said, “Moses gave permission to write a bill of divorce and to dismiss her.”
Mark 10:5	But Jesus responded by saying: “It was due to the hardness of your heart that he wrote that precept for you.
Mark 10:6	But from the beginning of creation, God made them male and female.
Mark 10:7	Because of this, a man shall leave behind his father and mother, and he shall cling to his wife.
Mark 10:8	And these two shall be one in flesh. And so, they are now, not two, but one flesh.
Mark 10:9	Therefore, what God has joined together, let no man separate.”
Mark 10:10	And again, in the house, his disciples questioned him about the same thing.
Mark 10:11	And he said to them: “Whoever dismisses his wife, and marries another, commits adultery against her.
Mark 10:12	And if a wife dismisses her husband, and is married to another, she commits adultery.”
Mark 10:13	And they brought to him the little children, so that he might touch them. But the disciples admonished those who brought them.
Mark 10:14	But when Jesus saw this, he took offense, and he said to them: “Allow the little ones to come to me, and do not prohibit them. For of such as these is the kingdom of God.
Mark 10:15	Amen I say to you, whoever will not accept the kingdom of God like a little child, will not enter into it.”
Mark 10:16	And embracing them, and laying his hands upon them, he blessed them.
Mark 10:17	And when he had departed on the way, a certain one, running up and kneeling before him, asked him, “Good Teacher, what shall I do, so that I may secure eternal life?”
Mark 10:18	But Jesus said to him, “Why call me good? No one is good except the one God.
Mark 10:19	You know the precepts: “Do not commit adultery. Do not kill. Do not steal. Do not speak false testimony. Do not deceive. Honor your father and mother.”
Mark 10:20	But in response, he said to him, “Teacher, all these I have observed from my youth.”
Mark 10:21	Then Jesus, gazing at him, loved him, and he said to him: “One thing is lacking to you. Go, sell whatever you have, and give to the poor, and then you will have treasure in heaven. And come, follow me.”
Mark 10:22	But he went away grieving, having been greatly saddened by the word. For he had many possessions.
Mark 10:23	And Jesus, looking around, said to his disciples, “How difficult it is for those who have riches to enter into the kingdom of God!”
Mark 10:24	And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus, answering again, said to them: “Little sons, how difficult it is for those who trust in money to enter into the kingdom of God!
Mark 10:25	It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than for the rich to enter into the kingdom of God.”
Mark 10:26	And they wondered even more, saying among themselves, “Who, then, can be saved?”
Mark 10:27	And Jesus, gazing at them, said: “With men it is impossible; but not with God. For with God all things are possible.”
Mark 10:28	And Peter began to say to him, “Behold, we have left all things and have followed you.”
Mark 10:29	In response, Jesus said: “Amen I say to you, There is no one who has left behind house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or children, or land, for my sake and for the Gospel,
Mark 10:30	who will not receive one hundred times as much, now in this time: houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and land, with persecutions, and in the future age eternal life.
Mark 10:31	But many of the first shall be last, and the last shall be first.”
Mark 10:32	Now they were on the way ascending to Jerusalem. And Jesus went ahead of them, and they were astonished. And those following him were afraid. And again, taking aside the twelve, he began to tell them what was about to happen to him.
Mark 10:33	“For behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man will be handed over to the leaders of the priests, and to the scribes, and the elders. And they will condemn him to death, and they will hand him over to the Gentiles.
Mark 10:34	And they will mock him, and spit on him, and scourge him, and put him to death. And on the third day, he will rise again.”
Mark 10:35	And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, drew near to him, saying, “Teacher, we wish that whatever we will ask, you would do for us.”
Mark 10:36	But he said to them, “What do you want me to do for you?”
Mark 10:37	And they said, “Grant to us that we may sit, one at your right and the other at your left, in your glory.”
Mark 10:38	But Jesus said to them: “You do not know what you are asking. Are you able to drink from the chalice from which I drink, or to be baptized with the baptism with which I am to be baptized?”
Mark 10:39	But they said to him, “We can.” Then Jesus said to them: “Indeed, you shall drink from the chalice, from which I drink; and you shall be baptized with the baptism, with which I am to be baptized.
Mark 10:40	But to sit at my right, or at my left, is not mine to give to you, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared.”
Mark 10:41	And the ten, upon hearing this, began to be indignant toward James and John.
Mark 10:42	But Jesus, calling them, said to them: “You know that those who seem to be leaders among the Gentiles dominate them, and their leaders exercise authority over them.
Mark 10:43	But it is not to be this way among you. Instead, whoever would become greater shall be your minister;
Mark 10:44	and whoever will be first among you shall be the servant of all.
Mark 10:45	So, too, the Son of man has not come so that they would minister to him, but so that he would minister and would give his life as a redemption for many.”
Mark 10:46	And they went to Jericho. And as he was setting out from Jericho with his disciples and a very numerous multitude, Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus, a blind man, sat begging beside the way.
Mark 10:47	And when he had heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out and to say, “Jesus, Son of David, take pity on me.”
Mark 10:48	And many admonished him to be quiet. But he cried out all the more, “Son of David, take pity on me.”
Mark 10:49	And Jesus, standing still, instructed him to be called. And they called the blind man, saying to him: “Be at peace. Arise. He is calling you.”
Mark 10:50	And casting aside his garment, he leapt up and went to him.
Mark 10:51	And in response, Jesus said to him, “What do you want, that I should do for you?” And the blind man said to him, “Master, that I may see.”
Mark 10:52	Then Jesus said to him, “Go, your faith has made you whole.” And immediately he saw, and he followed him on the way.
Mark 11:1	And as they were approaching Jerusalem and Bethania, toward the mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples,
Mark 11:2	and he said to them: “Go into the village that is opposite you, and immediately upon entering there, you will find a colt tied, on which no man has yet sat. Release him and bring him.
Mark 11:3	And if anyone will say to you: ‘What are you doing?’ Say that the Lord has need of him. And he will immediately send him here.”
Mark 11:4	And going out, they found the colt tied before the outer gate, at the meeting of two ways. And they untied him.
Mark 11:5	And some of those who were standing there said to them, “What are you doing by releasing the colt?”
Mark 11:6	And they spoke to them just as Jesus had instructed them. And they permitted them.
Mark 11:7	And they led the colt to Jesus. And they placed their garments on it; and he sat upon it.
Mark 11:8	Then many spread their garments along the way; but others cut down leafy branches from trees and scattered them on the way.
Mark 11:9	And those who went ahead, and those who followed, cried out saying: “Hosanna! Blessed is he who has arrived in the name of the Lord.
Mark 11:10	Blessed is the advent of the kingdom of our father David. Hosanna in the highest!”
Mark 11:11	And he entered into Jerusalem, into the temple. And having looked around at everything, since it was now the evening hour, he went out to Bethania with the twelve.
Mark 11:12	And the next day, as they were departing from Bethania, he was hungry.
Mark 11:13	And when he had seen a fig tree with leaves in the distance, he went to it, in case he might find something on it. And when he had gone to it, he found nothing but leaves. For it was not the season for figs.
Mark 11:14	And in response, he said to it, “From now on and forever, may no one eat fruit from you again!” And his disciples heard this.
Mark 11:15	And they went to Jerusalem. And when he had entered into the temple, he began to cast out the sellers and the buyers in the temple. And he overturned the tables of the moneychangers and the chairs of the vendors of doves.
Mark 11:16	And he would not permit anyone to carry goods through the temple.
Mark 11:17	And he taught them, saying: “Is it not written: ‘For my house shall be called the house of prayer for all nations?’ But you have made it into a den of robbers.”
Mark 11:18	And when the leaders of the priests, and the scribes, had heard this, they sought a means by which they might destroy him. For they feared him, because the entire multitude was in admiration over his doctrine.
Mark 11:19	And when evening had arrived, he departed from the city.
Mark 11:20	And when they passed by in the morning, they saw that the fig tree had dried up from the roots.
Mark 11:21	And Peter, remembering, said to him, “Master, behold, the fig tree that you cursed has withered.”
Mark 11:22	And in response, Jesus said to them: “Have the faith of God.
Mark 11:23	Amen I say to you, that whoever will say to this mountain, ‘Be taken up and cast into the sea,’ and who will not have hesitated in his heart, but will have believed: then whatever he has said be done, it shall be done for him.
Mark 11:24	For this reason, I say to you, all things whatsoever that you ask for when praying: believe that you will receive them, and they will happen for you.
Mark 11:25	And when you stand to pray, if you hold anything against anyone, forgive them, so that your Father, who is in heaven, may also forgive you your sins.
Mark 11:26	But if you will not forgive, neither will your Father, who is in heaven, forgive you your sins.”
Mark 11:27	And they went again to Jerusalem. And when he was walking in the temple, the leaders of the priests, and the scribes, and the elders approached him.
Mark 11:28	And they said to him: “By what authority do you do these things? And who has given you this authority, so that you would do these things?”
Mark 11:29	But in response, Jesus said to them: “I also will ask you one word, and if you answer me, I will tell you by what authority I do these things.
Mark 11:30	The baptism of John: was it from heaven or from men? Answer me.”
Mark 11:31	But they discussed it among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Then why did you not believe him?’
Mark 11:32	If we say, ‘From men,’ we fear the people. For they all hold that John was a true prophet.”
Mark 11:33	And answering, they said to Jesus, “We do not know.” And in response, Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.”
Mark 12:1	And he began to speak to them in parables: “A man dug a vineyard, and surrounded it with a hedge, and dug a pit, and built a tower, and he loaned it out to farmers, and he set out on a long journey.
Mark 12:2	And in time, he sent a servant to the farmers, in order to receive some of the fruit of the vineyard from the farmers.
Mark 12:3	But they, having apprehended him, beat him and sent him away empty.
Mark 12:4	And again, he sent another servant to them. And they wounded him on the head, and they treated him with contempt.
Mark 12:5	And again, he sent another, and him they killed, and many others: some they beat, but others they killed.
Mark 12:6	Therefore, having still one son, most dear to him, he sent him also to them, at the very end, saying, ‘For they will reverence my son.’
Mark 12:7	But the settlers said one to another: ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him. And then the inheritance will be ours.’
Mark 12:8	And apprehending him, they killed him. And they cast him out of the vineyard.
Mark 12:9	Therefore, what will the lord of the vineyard do?” “He will come and destroy the settlers. And he will give the vineyard to others.”
Mark 12:10	“And so, have you not read this scripture?: ‘The stone which the builders have rejected, the same has been made the head of the corner.
Mark 12:11	By the Lord has this been done, and it is wondrous in our eyes.’ ”
Mark 12:12	And they sought to take hold of him, but they feared the crowd. For they knew that he had spoken this parable about them. And leaving him behind, they went away.
Mark 12:13	And they sent some of the Pharisees and Herodians to him, so that they might trap him with words.
Mark 12:14	And these, arriving, said to him: “Teacher, we know that you are truthful and that you do not favor anyone; for you do not consider the appearance of men, but you teach the way of God in truth. Is it lawful to give the tribute to Caesar, or should we not give it?”
Mark 12:15	And knowing their skill in deception, he said to them: “Why do you test me? Bring me a denarius, so that I may see it.”
Mark 12:16	And they brought it to him. And he said to them, “Whose image and inscription is this?” They said to him, “Caesar’s.”
Mark 12:17	So in response, Jesus said to them, “Then render to Caesar, the things that are of Caesar; and to God, the things that are of God.” And they wondered over him.
Mark 12:18	And the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, approached him. And they questioned him, saying:
Mark 12:19	“Teacher, Moses wrote for us that if any man’s brother will have died and left behind a wife, and not have left behind sons, his brother should take his wife to himself and should raise up offspring for his brother.
Mark 12:20	So then, there were seven brothers. And the first took a wife, and he died without leaving behind offspring.
Mark 12:21	And the second took her, and he died. And neither did he leave behind offspring. And the third acted similarly.
Mark 12:22	And in like manner, each of the seven received her and did not leave behind offspring. Last of all, the woman also died.
Mark 12:23	Therefore, in the resurrection, when they will rise again, to which of them will she be a wife? For each of the seven had her as wife.”
Mark 12:24	And Jesus responded by saying to them: “But have you not gone astray, by knowing neither the scriptures, nor the power of God?
Mark 12:25	For when they will be resurrected from the dead, they shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage, but they are like the Angels in heaven.
Mark 12:26	But concerning the dead who rise again, have you not read in the book of Moses, how God spoke to him from the bush, saying: ‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?’
Mark 12:27	He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Therefore, you have gone far astray.”
Mark 12:28	And one of the scribes, who had heard them arguing, drew near to him. And seeing that he had answered them well, he questioned him as to which was the first commandment of all.
Mark 12:29	And Jesus answered him: “For the first commandment of all is this: ‘Listen, O Israel. The Lord your God is one God.
Mark 12:30	And you shall love the Lord your God from your whole heart, and from your whole soul, and from your whole mind, and from your whole strength. This is the first commandment.’
Mark 12:31	But the second is similar to it: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.”
Mark 12:32	And the scribe said to him: Well said, Teacher. You have spoken the truth that there is one God, and there is no other beside him;
Mark 12:33	and that he should be loved from the whole heart, and from the whole understanding, and from the whole soul, and from the whole strength. And to love one’s neighbor as one’s self is greater than all holocausts and sacrifices.”
Mark 12:34	And Jesus, seeing that he had responded wisely, said to him, “You are not far from the kingdom of God.” And after that, no one dared to question him.
Mark 12:35	And while teaching in the temple, Jesus said in answer: “How is it that the scribes say that the Christ is the son of David?
Mark 12:36	For David himself said in the Holy Spirit: ‘The Lord said to my Lord: Sit at my right hand, until I set your enemies as your footstool.’
Mark 12:37	Therefore, David himself calls him Lord, and so how can he be his son?” And a great multitude listened to him willingly.
Mark 12:38	And he said to them in his doctrine: “Beware of the scribes, who prefer to walk in long robes and to be greeted in the marketplace,
Mark 12:39	and to sit in the first chairs in the synagogues, and to have the first seats at feasts,
Mark 12:40	who devour the houses of widows under the pretense of long prayers. These shall receive the more extensive judgment.”
Mark 12:41	And Jesus, sitting opposite the offertory box, considered the way in which the crowd cast coins into the offertory, and that many of the wealthy cast in a great deal.
Mark 12:42	But when one poor widow had arrived, she put in two small coins, which is a quarter.
Mark 12:43	And calling together his disciples, he said to them: “Amen I say to you, that this poor widow has put in more than all those who contributed to the offertory.
Mark 12:44	For they all gave from their abundance, yet truly, she gave from her scarcity, even all that she had, her entire living.”
Mark 13:1	And as he was departing from the temple, one of his disciples said to him, “Teacher, observe these fine stones and fine structures.”
Mark 13:2	And in response, Jesus said to him: “Do you see all these great buildings? There shall not be left stone upon stone, which is not torn down.”
Mark 13:3	And as he sat at the Mount of Olives, opposite the temple, Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew questioned him privately.
Mark 13:4	“Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign when all these things will begin to be fulfilled?”
Mark 13:5	And Jesus, answering, began to say to them: “See to it that no one leads you astray.
Mark 13:6	For many will come in my name, saying, ‘For I am he,’ and they will lead many astray.
Mark 13:7	But when you will have heard of wars and rumors of wars, you should not be afraid. For these things must be, but the end is not so soon.
Mark 13:8	For nation will rise up against nation, and kingdom over kingdom, and there shall be earthquakes in various places, and famines. These are but the beginning of the sorrows.
Mark 13:9	But see to yourselves. For they will hand you over to councils, and in the synagogues you will be beaten, and you shall stand before governors and kings because of me, as a testimony for them.
Mark 13:10	And the Gospel must first be preached to all nations.
Mark 13:11	And when they have seized you and handed you over, do not consider in advance what to say. But whatever will be given you in that hour, say that. For you will not be speaking, but the Holy Spirit.
Mark 13:12	Then brother will betray brother to death, and the father, a son; and children will rise up against their parents and will bring about their death.
Mark 13:13	And you will be hated by all for the sake of my name. But whoever will have persevered unto the end, the same will be saved.
Mark 13:14	Then, when you have seen the abomination of desolation, standing where it ought not to be, let the reader understand: then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.
Mark 13:15	And let whoever is on the rooftop not descend to the house, nor enter so as to take anything from the house.
Mark 13:16	And let whoever may be in the field not return to take his garment.
Mark 13:17	But woe to those who are pregnant or nursing in those days.
Mark 13:18	Truly, pray that these things may not happen in winter.
Mark 13:19	For those days shall have such tribulations as have not been since the beginning of the creation that God founded, even until now, and shall not be.
Mark 13:20	And unless the Lord had shortened the days, no flesh would be saved. But, for the sake of the elect, whom he has chosen, he has shortened the days.
Mark 13:21	And then, if anyone will have said to you: ‘Behold, here is the Christ. Behold, in that place.’ Do not believe it.
Mark 13:22	For false Christs and false prophets will rise up, and they will present signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if it were possible, even the elect.
Mark 13:23	Therefore, you must take heed. Behold, I have foretold all to you.
Mark 13:24	But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give her splendor.
Mark 13:25	And the stars of heaven will be falling down, and the powers that are in heaven will be moved.
Mark 13:26	And then they shall see the Son of man arriving on the clouds, with great power and glory.
Mark 13:27	And then he will send his Angels, and gather together his elect, from the four winds, from the limits of the earth, to the limits of heaven.
Mark 13:28	Now from the fig tree discern a parable. When its branch becomes tender and the foliage has been formed, you know that summer is very near.
Mark 13:29	So also, when you will have seen these things happen, know that it is very near, even at the doors.
Mark 13:30	Amen I say to you, that this lineage shall not pass away, until all these things have happened.
Mark 13:31	Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass away.
Mark 13:32	But concerning that day or hour, no one knows, neither the Angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.
Mark 13:33	Take heed, be vigilant, and pray. For you do not know when the time may be.
Mark 13:34	It is like a man who, setting out on a sojourn, left behind his house, and gave his servants authority over every work, and instructed the doorkeeper to stand watch.
Mark 13:35	Therefore, be vigilant, for you do not know when the lord of the house may arrive: in the evening, or in the middle of the night, or at first light, or in the morning.
Mark 13:36	Otherwise, when he will have arrived unexpectedly, he may find you sleeping.
Mark 13:37	But what I say to you, I say to all: Be vigilant.”
Mark 14:1	Now the feast of Passover and of Unleavened Bread was two days away. And the leaders of the priests, and the scribes, were seeking a means by which they might deceitfully seize him and kill him.
Mark 14:2	But they said, “Not on the feast day, lest perhaps there may be a tumult among the people.”
Mark 14:3	And when he was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper, and was reclining to eat, a woman arrived having an alabaster container of ointment, of precious spikenard. And breaking open the alabaster container, she poured it over his head.
Mark 14:4	But there were some who became indignant within themselves and who were saying: “What is the reason for this waste of the ointment?
Mark 14:5	For this ointment could have been sold for more than three hundred denarii and been given to the poor.” And they murmured against her.
Mark 14:6	But Jesus said: “Permit her. What is the reason that you trouble her? She has done a good deed for me.
Mark 14:7	For the poor, you have with you always. And whenever you wish, you are able to do good to them. But you do not have me always.
Mark 14:8	But she has done what she could. She has arrived in advance to anoint my body for burial.
Mark 14:9	Amen I say to you, wherever this Gospel shall be preached throughout the entire world, the things she has done also shall be told, in memory of her.”
Mark 14:10	And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went away, to the leaders of the priests, in order to betray him to them.
Mark 14:11	And they, upon hearing it, were gladdened. And they promised him that they would give him money. And he sought an opportune means by which he might betray him.
Mark 14:12	And on the first day of Unleavened Bread, when they immolate the Passover, the disciples said to him, “Where do you want us to go and prepare for you to eat the Passover?”
Mark 14:13	And he sent two of his disciples, and he said to them: “Go into the city. And you will meet a man carrying a pitcher of water; follow him.
Mark 14:14	And wherever he will have entered, say to the owner of the house, ‘The Teacher says: Where is my dining room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?’
Mark 14:15	And he will show you a large cenacle, fully furnished. And there, you shall prepare it for us.”
Mark 14:16	And his disciples departed and went into the city. And they found it just as he had told them. And they prepared the Passover.
Mark 14:17	Then, when evening came, he arrived with the twelve.
Mark 14:18	And while reclining and eating with them at table, Jesus said, “Amen I say to you, that one of you, who eats with me, will betray me.”
Mark 14:19	But they began to be sorrowful and to say to him, one at a time: “Is it I?”
Mark 14:20	And he said to them: “It is one of the twelve, who dips his hand with me in the dish.
Mark 14:21	And indeed, the Son of man goes, just as it has been written of him. But woe to that man by whom the Son of man will be betrayed. It would be better for that man if he had never been born.”
Mark 14:22	And while eating with them, Jesus took bread. And blessing it, he broke it and gave it to them, and he said: “Take. This is my body.”
Mark 14:23	And having taken the chalice, giving thanks, he gave it to them. And they all drank from it.
Mark 14:24	And he said to them: “This is my blood of the new covenant, which shall be shed for many.
Mark 14:25	Amen I say to you, that I will no longer drink from this fruit of the vine, until that day when I will drink it new in the kingdom of God.”
Mark 14:26	And having sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Mark 14:27	And Jesus said to them: “You will all fall away from me in this night. For it has been written: ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’
Mark 14:28	But after I have risen again, I will go before you to Galilee.”
Mark 14:29	Then Peter said to him, “Even if all will have fallen away from you, yet I will not.”
Mark 14:30	And Jesus said to him, “Amen I say to you, that this day, in this night, before the rooster has uttered its voice twice, you will deny me three times.”
Mark 14:31	But he spoke further, “Even if I must die along with you, I will not deny you.” And they all spoke similarly also.
Mark 14:32	And they went to a country estate, by the name of Gethsemani. And he said to his disciples, “Sit here, while I pray.”
Mark 14:33	And he took Peter, and James, and John with him. And he began to be afraid and wearied.
Mark 14:34	And he said to them: “My soul is sorrowful, even unto death. Remain here and be vigilant.”
Mark 14:35	And when he had proceeded on a little ways, he fell prostrate on the ground. And he prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass away from him.
Mark 14:36	And he said: “Abba, Father, all things are possible to you. Take this chalice from me. But let it be, not as I will, but as you will.”
Mark 14:37	And he went and found them sleeping. And he said to Peter: “Simon, are you sleeping? Were you not able to be vigilant for one hour?
Mark 14:38	Watch and pray, so that you may not enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
Mark 14:39	And going away again, he prayed, saying the same words.
Mark 14:40	And upon returning, he found them sleeping yet again, (for their eyes were heavy) and they did not know how to respond to him.
Mark 14:41	And he arrived for the third time, and he said to them: “Sleep now, and take rest. It is enough. The hour has arrived. Behold, the Son of man will be betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Mark 14:42	Rise up, let us go. Behold, he who will betray me is near.”
Mark 14:43	And while he was still speaking, Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, arrived, and with him was a large crowd with swords and clubs, sent from the leaders of the priests, and the scribes, and the elders.
Mark 14:44	Now his betrayer had given them a sign, saying: “He whom I shall kiss, it is he. Take hold of him, and lead him away cautiously.”
Mark 14:45	And when he had arrived, immediately drawing near to him, he said: “Hail, Master!” And he kissed him.
Mark 14:46	But they laid hands on him and held him.
Mark 14:47	Then a certain one of those standing near, drawing a sword, struck a servant of the high priest and cut off his ear.
Mark 14:48	And in response, Jesus said to them: “Have you set out to apprehend me, just as if to a robber, with swords and clubs?
Mark 14:49	Daily, I was with you in the temple teaching, and you did not take hold of me. But in this way, the scriptures are fulfilled.”
Mark 14:50	Then his disciples, leaving him behind, all fled away.
Mark 14:51	Now a certain young man followed him, having nothing but a fine linen cloth over himself. And they took hold of him.
Mark 14:52	But he, rejecting the fine linen cloth, escaped from them naked.
Mark 14:53	And they led Jesus to the high priest. And all the priests and the scribes and the elders came together.
Mark 14:54	But Peter followed him from a distance, even into the court of the high priest. And he sat with the servants at the fire and warmed himself.
Mark 14:55	Yet truly, the leaders of the priests and the entire council sought testimony against Jesus, so that they might deliver him to death, and they found none.
Mark 14:56	For many spoke false testimony against him, but their testimony did not agree.
Mark 14:57	And certain ones, rising up, bore false witness against him, saying:
Mark 14:58	“For we heard him say, ‘I will destroy this temple, made with hands, and within three days I will build another, not made with hands.’ ”
Mark 14:59	And their testimony did not agree.
Mark 14:60	And the high priest, rising up in their midst, questioned Jesus, saying, “Do you have nothing to say in answer to the things that are brought against you by these ones?”
Mark 14:61	But he was silent and gave no answer. Again, the high priest questioned him, and he said to him, “Are you the Christ, the Son of the Blessed God?”
Mark 14:62	Then Jesus said to him: “I am. And you shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of the power of God and arriving with the clouds of heaven.”
Mark 14:63	Then the high priest, rending his garments, said: “Why do we still require witnesses?
Mark 14:64	You have heard the blasphemy. How does it seem to you?” And they all condemned him, as guilty unto death.
Mark 14:65	And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face and to strike him with fists, and to say to him, “Prophesy.” And the servants struck him with the palms their hands.
Mark 14:66	And while Peter was in the court below, one of the maidservants of the high priest arrived.
Mark 14:67	And when she had seen Peter warming himself, she stared at him, and she said: “You also were with Jesus of Nazareth.”
Mark 14:68	But he denied it, saying, “I neither know nor understand what you saying.” And he went outside, in front of the court; and a rooster crowed.
Mark 14:69	Then again, when a maidservant had seen him, she began to say to the bystanders, “For this is one of them.”
Mark 14:70	But he denied it again. And after a little while, again those standing near said to Peter: “In truth, you are one of them. For you, too, are a Galilean.”
Mark 14:71	Then he began to curse and to swear, saying, “For I do not know this man, about whom you are speaking.”
Mark 14:72	And immediately the rooster crowed again. And Peter remembered the word that Jesus had said to him, “Before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.” And he began to weep.
Mark 15:1	And immediately in the morning, after the leaders of the priests had taken counsel with the elders and the scribes and the entire council, binding Jesus, they led him away and delivered him to Pilate.
Mark 15:2	And Pilate questioned him, “You are the king of the Jews?” But in response, he said to him, “You are saying it.”
Mark 15:3	And the leaders of the priests accused him in many things.
Mark 15:4	Then Pilate again questioned him, saying: “Do you not have any response? See how greatly they accuse you.”
Mark 15:5	But Jesus continued to give no response, so that Pilate wondered.
Mark 15:6	Now on the feast day, he was accustomed to release to them one of the prisoners, whomever they requested.
Mark 15:7	But there was one called Barabbas, who had committed murder in the sedition, who was confined with those of the sedition.
Mark 15:8	And when the crowd had ascended, they began to petition him to do as he always did for them.
Mark 15:9	But Pilate answered them and said, “Do you want me to release to you the king of the Jews?”
Mark 15:10	For he knew that it was out of envy that the leaders of the priests had betrayed him.
Mark 15:11	Then the chief priests incited the crowd, so that he would release Barabbas to them instead.
Mark 15:12	But Pilate, responding again, said to them: “Then what do you want me to do with the king of the Jews?”
Mark 15:13	But again they cried out, “Crucify him.”
Mark 15:14	Yet truly, Pilate said to them: “Why? What evil has he done?” But they cried out all the more, “Crucify him.”
Mark 15:15	Then Pilate, wishing to satisfy the people, released Barabbas to them, and he delivered Jesus, having severely scourged him, to be crucified.
Mark 15:16	Then the soldiers led him away to the court of the praetorium. And they called together the entire cohort.
Mark 15:17	And they clothed him with purple. And platting a crown of thorns, they placed it on him.
Mark 15:18	And they began to salute him: “Hail, king of the Jews.”
Mark 15:19	And they struck his head with a reed, and they spit on him. And kneeling down, they reverenced him.
Mark 15:20	And after they had mocked him, they stripped him of the purple, and they clothed him in his own garments. And they led him away, so that they might crucify him.
Mark 15:21	And they compelled a certain passerby, Simon the Cyrenian, who was arriving from the countryside, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to take up his cross.
Mark 15:22	And they led him through to the place called Golgotha, which means, ‘the Place of Calvary.’
Mark 15:23	And they gave him wine with myrrh to drink. But he did not accept it.
Mark 15:24	And while crucifying him, they divided his garments, casting lots over them, to see who would take what.
Mark 15:25	Now it was the third hour. And they crucified him.
Mark 15:26	And the title of his case was written as: THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Mark 15:27	And with him they crucified two robbers: one at his right, and the other at his left.
Mark 15:28	And the scripture was fulfilled, which says: “And with the iniquitous he was reputed.”
Mark 15:29	And the passersby blasphemed him, shaking their heads and saying, “Ah, you who would destroy the temple of God, and in three days rebuild it,
Mark 15:30	save yourself by descending from the cross.”
Mark 15:31	And similarly the leaders of the priests, mocking him with the scribes, said to one another: “He saved others. He is not able to save himself.
Mark 15:32	Let the Christ, the king of Israel, descend now from the cross, so that we may see and believe.” Those who were crucified with him also insulted him.
Mark 15:33	And when the sixth hour arrived, a darkness occurred over the entire earth, until the ninth hour.
Mark 15:34	And at the ninth hour, Jesus cried out with a loud voice, saying, “Eloi, Eloi, lamma sabacthani?” which means, “My God, My God, why have you forsaken me?”
Mark 15:35	And some of those standing near, upon hearing this, said, “Behold, he is calling Elijah.”
Mark 15:36	Then one of them, running and filling a sponge with vinegar, and placing it around a reed, gave it to him to drink, saying: “Wait. Let us see if Elijah will come to take him down.”
Mark 15:37	Then Jesus, having emitted a loud cry, expired.
Mark 15:38	And the veil of the temple was torn in two, from the top to the bottom.
Mark 15:39	Then the centurion who stood opposite him, seeing that he had expired while crying out in this way, said: “Truly, this man was the Son of God.”
Mark 15:40	Now there were also women watching from a distance, among whom were Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the younger and of Joseph, and Salome,
Mark 15:41	(and while he was in Galilee, they followed him and ministered to him) and many other women, who had ascended along with him to Jerusalem.
Mark 15:42	And when evening had now arrived (because it was the Preparation Day, which is before the Sabbath)
Mark 15:43	there arrived Joseph of Arimathea, a noble council member, who himself was also awaiting the kingdom of God. And he boldly entered to Pilate and petitioned for the body of Jesus.
Mark 15:44	But Pilate wondered if he had already died. And summoning a centurion, he questioned him as to whether he was already dead.
Mark 15:45	And when he had been informed by the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.
Mark 15:46	Then Joseph, having bought a fine linen cloth, and taking him down, wrapped him in the fine linen and laid him in a sepulcher, which was hewn from a rock. And he rolled a stone to the entrance of the tomb.
Mark 15:47	Now Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joseph observed where he was laid.
Mark 16:1	And when the Sabbath had passed, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought aromatic spices, so that when they arrived they could anoint Jesus.
Mark 16:2	And very early in the morning, on the first of the Sabbaths, they went to the tomb, the sun having now risen.
Mark 16:3	And they said to one another, “Who will roll back the stone for us, away from the entrance of the tomb?”
Mark 16:4	And looking, they saw that the stone was rolled back. For certainly it was very large.
Mark 16:5	And upon entering the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, covered with a white robe, and they were astonished.
Mark 16:6	And he said to them, “Do not become frightened. You are seeking Jesus of Nazareth, the Crucified One. He has risen. He is not here. Behold, the place where they laid him.
Mark 16:7	But go, tell his disciples and Peter that he is going before you into Galilee. There you shall see him, just as he told you.”
Mark 16:8	But they, going out, fled from the tomb. For trembling and fear had overwhelmed them. And they said nothing to anyone. For they were afraid.
Mark 16:9	But he, rising early on the first Sabbath, appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven demons.
Mark 16:10	She went and announced it to those who had been with him, while they were mourning and weeping.
Mark 16:11	And they, upon hearing that he was alive and that he had been seen by her, did not believe it.
Mark 16:12	But after these events, he was shown in another likeness to two of them walking, as they were going out to the countryside.
Mark 16:13	And they, returning, reported it to the others; neither did they believe them.
Mark 16:14	Finally, he appeared to the eleven, as they sat at table. And he rebuked them for their incredulity and hardness of heart, because they did not believe those who had seen that he had risen again.
Mark 16:15	And he said to them: “Go forth to the whole world and preach the Gospel to every creature.
Mark 16:16	Whoever will have believed and been baptized will be saved. Yet truly, whoever will not have believed will be condemned.
Mark 16:17	Now these signs will accompany those who believe. In my name, they shall cast out demons. They will speak in new languages.
Mark 16:18	They will take up serpents, and, if they drink anything deadly, it will not harm them. They shall lay their hands upon the sick, and they will be well.”
Mark 16:19	And indeed, the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven, and he sits at the right hand of God.
Mark 16:20	Then they, setting out, preached everywhere, with the Lord cooperating and confirming the word by the accompanying signs.
Luke 1:1	Since, indeed, many have attempted to set in order a narrative of the things that have been completed among us,
Luke 1:2	just as they have been handed on to those of us who from the beginning saw the same and were ministers of the word,
Luke 1:3	so it seemed good to me also, having diligently followed everything from the beginning, to write to you, in an orderly manner, most excellent Theophilus,
Luke 1:4	so that you might know the truthfulness of those words by which you have been instructed.
Luke 1:5	There was, in the days of Herod, king of Judea, a certain priest named Zechariah, of the section of Abijah, and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
Luke 1:6	Now they were both just before God, progressing in all of the commandments and the justifications of the Lord without blame.
Luke 1:7	And they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they both had become advanced in years.
Luke 1:8	Then it happened that, when he was exercising the priesthood before God, in the order of his section,
Luke 1:9	according to the custom of the priesthood, the lot fell so that he would offer incense, entering into the temple of the Lord.
Luke 1:10	And the entire multitude of the people was praying outside, at the hour of incense.
Luke 1:11	Then there appeared to him an Angel of the Lord, standing at the right of the altar of incense.
Luke 1:12	And upon seeing him, Zechariah was disturbed, and fear fell over him.
Luke 1:13	But the Angel said to him: “Do not be afraid, Zechariah, for your prayer has been heard, and your wife Elizabeth shall bear a son to you. And you shall call his name John.
Luke 1:14	And there will be joy and exultation for you, and many will rejoice in his nativity.
Luke 1:15	For he will be great in the sight of the Lord, and he will not drink wine or strong drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother’s womb.
Luke 1:16	And he will convert many of the sons of Israel to the Lord their God.
Luke 1:17	And he will go before him with the spirit and power of Elijah, so that he may turn the hearts of the fathers to the sons, and the incredulous to the prudence of the just, so as to prepare for the Lord a completed people.”
Luke 1:18	And Zechariah said to the Angel: “How may I know this? For I am elderly, and my wife is advanced in years.”
Luke 1:19	And in response, the Angel said to him: “I am Gabriel, who stands before God, and I have been sent to speak to you, and to proclaim these things to you.
Luke 1:20	And behold, you will be silent and unable to speak, until the day on which these things shall be, because you have not believed my words, which will be fulfilled in their time.”
Luke 1:21	And the people were waiting for Zechariah. And they wondered why he was being delayed in the temple.
Luke 1:22	Then, when he came out, he was unable to speak to them. And they realized that he had seen a vision in the temple. And he was making signs to them, but he remained mute.
Luke 1:23	And it happened that, after the days of his office were completed, he went away to his house.
Luke 1:24	Then, after those days, his wife Elizabeth conceived, and she hid herself for five months, saying:
Luke 1:25	“For the Lord did this for me, at the time when he decided to take away my reproach among men.”
Luke 1:26	Then, in the sixth month, the Angel Gabriel was sent by God, to a city of Galilee named Nazareth,
Luke 1:27	to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the name of the virgin was Mary.
Luke 1:28	And upon entering, the Angel said to her: “Hail, full of grace. The Lord is with you. Blessed are you among women.”
Luke 1:29	And when she had heard this, she was disturbed by his words, and she considered what kind of greeting this might be.
Luke 1:30	And the Angel said to her: “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found grace with God.
Luke 1:31	Behold, you shall conceive in your womb, and you shall bear a son, and you shall call his name: JESUS.
Luke 1:32	He will be great, and he will be called the Son of the Most High, and the Lord God will give him the throne of David his father. And he will reign in the house of Jacob for eternity.
Luke 1:33	And his kingdom shall have no end.”
Luke 1:34	Then Mary said to the Angel, “How shall this be done, since I do not know man?”
Luke 1:35	And in response, the Angel said to her: “The Holy Spirit will pass over you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. And because of this also, the Holy One who will be born of you shall be called the Son of God.
Luke 1:36	And behold, your cousin Elizabeth has herself also conceived a son, in her old age. And this is the sixth month for her who is called barren.
Luke 1:37	For no word will be impossible with God.”
Luke 1:38	Then Mary said: “Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord. Let it be done to me according to your word.” And the Angel departed from her.
Luke 1:39	And in those days, Mary, rising up, traveled quickly into the hill country, to a city of Judah.
Luke 1:40	And she entered into the house of Zechariah, and she greeted Elizabeth.
Luke 1:41	And it happened that, as Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the infant leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
Luke 1:42	And she cried out with a loud voice and said: “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb.
Luke 1:43	And how does this concern me, so that the mother of my Lord would come to me?
Luke 1:44	For behold, as the voice of your greeting came to my ears, the infant in my womb leaped for joy.
Luke 1:45	And blessed are you who believed, for the things that were spoken to you by the Lord shall be accomplished.”
Luke 1:46	And Mary said: “My soul magnifies the Lord.
Luke 1:47	And my spirit leaps for joy in God my Saviour.
Luke 1:48	For he has looked with favor on the humility of his handmaid. For behold, from this time, all generations shall call me blessed.
Luke 1:49	For he who is great has done great things for me, and holy is his name.
Luke 1:50	And his mercy is from generation to generations for those who fear him.
Luke 1:51	He has accomplished powerful deeds with his arm. He has scattered the arrogant in the intentions of their heart.
Luke 1:52	He has deposed the powerful from their seat, and he has exalted the humble.
Luke 1:53	He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent away empty.
Luke 1:54	He has taken up his servant Israel, mindful of his mercy,
Luke 1:55	just as he spoke to our fathers: to Abraham and to his offspring forever.”
Luke 1:56	Then Mary stayed with her for about three months. And she returned to her own house.
Luke 1:57	Now the time for Elizabeth to give birth arrived, and she brought forth a son.
Luke 1:58	And her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had magnified his mercy with her, and so they congratulated her.
Luke 1:59	And it happened that, on the eighth day, they arrived to circumcise the boy, and they called him by his father’s name, Zechariah.
Luke 1:60	And in response, his mother said: “Not so. Instead, he shall be called John.”
Luke 1:61	And they said to her, “But there is no one among your relatives who is called by that name.”
Luke 1:62	Then they made signs to his father, as to what he wanted him to be called.
Luke 1:63	And requesting a writing tablet, he wrote, saying: “His name is John.” And they all wondered.
Luke 1:64	Then, at once, his mouth was opened, and his tongue loosened, and he spoke, blessing God.
Luke 1:65	And fear fell upon all of their neighbors. And all these words were made known throughout all the hill country of Judea.
Luke 1:66	And all those who heard it stored it up in their heart, saying: “What do you think this boy will be?” And indeed, the hand of the Lord was with him.
Luke 1:67	And his father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit. And he prophesied, saying:
Luke 1:68	“Blessed is the Lord God of Israel. For he has visited and has wrought the redemption of his people.
Luke 1:69	And he has raised up a horn of salvation for us, in the house of David his servant,
Luke 1:70	just as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, who are from ages past:
Luke 1:71	salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all those who hate us,
Luke 1:72	to accomplish mercy with our fathers, and to call to mind his holy testament,
Luke 1:73	the oath, which he swore to Abraham, our father, that he would grant to us,
Luke 1:74	so that, having been freed from the hand of our enemies, we may serve him without fear,
Luke 1:75	in holiness and in justice before him, throughout all our days.
Luke 1:76	And you, child, shall be called the prophet of the Most High. For you will go before the face of the Lord: to prepare his ways,
Luke 1:77	to give knowledge of salvation to his people for the remission of their sins,
Luke 1:78	through the heart of the mercy of our God, by which, descending from on high, he has visited us,
Luke 1:79	to illuminate those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, and to direct our feet in the way of peace.”
Luke 1:80	And the child grew, and he was strengthened in spirit. And he was in the wilderness, until the day of his manifestation to Israel.
Luke 2:1	And it happened in those days that a decree went out from Caesar Augustus, so that the whole world would be enrolled.
Luke 2:2	This was the first enrollment; it was made by the ruler of Syria, Quirinius.
Luke 2:3	And all went to be declared, each one to his own city.
Luke 2:4	Then Joseph also ascended from Galilee, from the city of Nazareth, into Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of David,
Luke 2:5	in order to be declared, with Mary his espoused wife, who was with child.
Luke 2:6	Then it happened that, while they were there, the days were completed, so that she would give birth.
Luke 2:7	And she brought forth her firstborn son. And she wrapped him in swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them at the inn.
Luke 2:8	And there were shepherds in the same region, being vigilant and keeping watch in the night over their flock.
Luke 2:9	And behold, an Angel of the Lord stood near them, and the brightness of God shone around them, and they were struck with a great fear.
Luke 2:10	And the Angel said to them: “Do not be afraid. For, behold, I proclaim to you a great joy, which will be for all the people.
Luke 2:11	For today a Saviour has been born for you in the city of David: he is Christ the Lord.
Luke 2:12	And this will be a sign for you: you will find the infant wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger.”
Luke 2:13	And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the celestial army, praising God and saying,
Luke 2:14	“Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men of good will.”
Luke 2:15	And it happened that, when the Angels had departed from them into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, “Let us cross over to Bethlehem and see this word, which has happened, which the Lord has revealed to us.”
Luke 2:16	And they went quickly. And they found Mary and Joseph; and the infant was lying in a manger.
Luke 2:17	Then, upon seeing this, they understood the word that had been spoken to them about this boy.
Luke 2:18	And all who heard it were amazed by this, and by those things which were told to them by the shepherds.
Luke 2:19	But Mary kept all these words, pondering them in her heart.
Luke 2:20	And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, just as it was told to them.
Luke 2:21	And after eight days were ended, so that the boy would be circumcised, his name was called JESUS, just as he was called by the Angel before he was conceived in the womb.
Luke 2:22	And after the days of her purification were fulfilled, according to the law of Moses, they brought him to Jerusalem, in order to present him to the Lord,
Luke 2:23	just as it is written in the law of the Lord, “For every male opening the womb shall be called holy to the Lord,”
Luke 2:24	and in order to offer a sacrifice, according to what is said in the law of the Lord, “a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons.”
Luke 2:25	And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon, and this man was just and God-fearing, awaiting the consolation of Israel. And the Holy Spirit was with him.
Luke 2:26	And he had received an answer from the Holy Spirit: that he would not see his own death before he had seen the Christ of the Lord.
Luke 2:27	And he went with the Spirit to the temple. And when the child Jesus was brought in by his parents, in order to act on his behalf according to the custom of the law,
Luke 2:28	he also took him up, into his arms, and he blessed God and said:
Luke 2:29	“Now you may dismiss your servant in peace, O Lord, according to your word.
Luke 2:30	For my eyes have seen your salvation,
Luke 2:31	which you have prepared before the face of all peoples:
Luke 2:32	the light of revelation to the nations and the glory of your people Israel.”
Luke 2:33	And his father and mother were wondering over these things, which were spoken about him.
Luke 2:34	And Simeon blessed them, and he said to his mother Mary: “Behold, this one has been set for the ruin and for the resurrection of many in Israel, and as a sign which will be contradicted.
Luke 2:35	And a sword will pass through your own soul, so that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.”
Luke 2:36	And there was a prophetess, Anna, a daughter of Phanuel, from the tribe of Asher. She was very advanced in years, and she had lived with her husband for seven years from her virginity.
Luke 2:37	And then she was a widow, even to her eighty-fourth year. And without departing from the temple, she was a servant to fasting and prayer, night and day.
Luke 2:38	And entering at the same hour, she confessed to the Lord. And she spoke about him to all who were awaiting the redemption of Israel.
Luke 2:39	And after they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their city, Nazareth.
Luke 2:40	Now the child grew, and he was strengthened with the fullness of wisdom. And the grace of God was in him.
Luke 2:41	And his parents went every year to Jerusalem, at the time of the solemnity of Passover.
Luke 2:42	And when he had become twelve years old, they ascended to Jerusalem, according to the custom of the feast day.
Luke 2:43	And having completed the days, when they returned, the boy Jesus remained in Jerusalem. And his parents did not realize this.
Luke 2:44	But, supposing that he was in the company, they went a day’s journey, seeking him among their relatives and acquaintances.
Luke 2:45	And not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem, seeking him.
Luke 2:46	And it happened that, after three days, they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, listening to them and questioning them.
Luke 2:47	But all who listened to him were astonished over his prudence and his responses.
Luke 2:48	And upon seeing him, they wondered. And his mother said to him: “Son, why have you acted this way toward us? Behold, your father and I were seeking you in sorrow.”
Luke 2:49	And he said to them: “How is it that you were seeking me? For did you not know that it is necessary for me to be in these things which are of my Father?”
Luke 2:50	And they did not understand the word that he spoke to them.
Luke 2:51	And he descended with them and went to Nazareth. And he was subordinate to them. And his mother kept all these words in her heart.
Luke 2:52	And Jesus advanced in wisdom, and in age, and in grace, with God and men.
Luke 3:1	Then, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being procurator of Judea, and Herod tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene,
Luke 3:2	under the high priests Annas and Caiaphas: the word of the Lord came to John, the son of Zechariah, in the wilderness.
Luke 3:3	And he went into the entire region of the Jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the remission of sins,
Luke 3:4	just as it has been written in the book of the sermons of the prophet Isaiah: “The voice of one crying out in the wilderness: Prepare the way of the Lord. Make straight his paths.
Luke 3:5	Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low. And what is crooked shall be made straight. And the rough paths shall be made into level ways.
Luke 3:6	And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.”
Luke 3:7	Therefore, he said to the crowd that went out in order to be baptized by him: “You progeny of vipers! Who told you to flee from the approaching wrath?
Luke 3:8	So then, produce fruits worthy of repentance. And do not begin to say, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I tell you that God has the power to raise up sons to Abraham from these stones.
Luke 3:9	For even now the axe has been placed at the root of the trees. Therefore, every tree that does not produce good fruit shall be cut down and cast into the fire.”
Luke 3:10	And the crowed was questioning him, saying, “What then should we do?”
Luke 3:11	But in response, he said to them: “Whoever has two coats, let him give to those who do not have. And whoever has food, let him act similarly.”
Luke 3:12	Now the tax collectors also came to be baptized, and they said to him, “Teacher, what should we do?”
Luke 3:13	But he said to them, “You should do nothing more than what has been appointed to you.”
Luke 3:14	Then the soldiers also questioned him, saying, “And what should we do?” And he said to them: “You should strike no one, and you should not make false accusations. And be content with your pay.”
Luke 3:15	Now all were thinking about John in their hearts, and the people were supposing that perhaps he might be the Christ.
Luke 3:16	John responded by saying to everyone: “Indeed, I baptize you with water. But there will arrive one stronger than me, the laces of whose shoes I am not worthy to loosen. He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit, and with fire.
Luke 3:17	His winnowing fan is in his hand. And he will purify his threshing floor. And he will gather the wheat into the barn. But the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.”
Luke 3:18	Indeed, he also proclaimed many other things, exhorting the people.
Luke 3:19	But Herod the tetrarch, when he was corrected by him concerning Herodias, his brother’s wife, and concerning all the evils that Herod had done,
Luke 3:20	added this also, above all else: that he confined John to prison.
Luke 3:21	Now it happened that, when all the people were being baptized, Jesus was baptized; and as he was praying, heaven was opened.
Luke 3:22	And the Holy Spirit, in a corporal appearance like a dove, descended upon him. And a voice came from heaven: “You are my beloved Son. In you, I am well pleased.”
Luke 3:23	And Jesus himself was beginning to be about thirty years old, being (as it was supposed) the son of Joseph, who was of Heli, who was of Matthat,
Luke 3:24	who was of Levi, who was of Melchi, who was of Jannai, who was of Joseph,
Luke 3:25	who was of Mattathias, who was of Amos, who was of Nahum, who was of Esli, who was of Naggai,
Luke 3:26	who was of Maath, who was of Mattathias, who was of Semein, who was of Josech, who was of Joda,
Luke 3:27	who was of Joanan, who was of Rhesa, who was of Zerubbabel, who was of Shealtiel, who was of Neri,
Luke 3:28	who was of Melchi, who was of Addi, who was of Cosam, who was of Elmadam, who was of Er,
Luke 3:29	who was of Joshua, who was of Eliezer, who was of Jorim, who was of Matthat, who was of Levi,
Luke 3:30	who was of Simeon, who was of Judah, who was of Joseph, who was of Jonam, who was of Eliakim,
Luke 3:31	who was of Melea, who was of Menna, who was of Mattatha, who was of Nathan, who was of David,
Luke 3:32	who was of Jesse, who was of Obed, who was of Boaz, who was of Salmon, who was of Nahshon,
Luke 3:33	who was of Amminadab, who was of Aram, who was of Hezron, who was of Perez, who was of Judah,
Luke 3:34	who was of Jacob, who was of Isaac, who was of Abraham, who was of Terah, who was of Nahor,
Luke 3:35	who was of Serug, who was of Reu, who was of Peleg, who was of Eber, who was of Shelah,
Luke 3:36	who was of Cainan, who was of Arphaxad, who was of Shem, who was Of Noah, who was of Lamech,
Luke 3:37	who was of Methuselah, who was of Enoch, who was of Jared, who was of Mahalalel, who was of Cainan,
Luke 3:38	who was of Enos, who was of Seth, who was of Adam, who was of God.
Luke 4:1	And Jesus, filled with the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan. And he was urged by the Spirit into the wilderness
Luke 4:2	for forty days, and he was tested by the devil. And he ate nothing in those days. And when they were completed, he was hungry.
Luke 4:3	Then the devil said to him, “If you are the Son of God, speak to this stone, so that it may be made into bread.”
Luke 4:4	And Jesus answered him, “It is written: ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.’ ”
Luke 4:5	And the devil led him onto a high mountain, and he showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time,
Luke 4:6	and he said to him: “To you, I will give all this power, and its glory. For they have been handed over to me, and I give them to whomever I wish.
Luke 4:7	Therefore, if you will worship before me, all will be yours.”
Luke 4:8	And in response, Jesus said to him: “It is written: ‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and you shall serve him alone.’ ”
Luke 4:9	And he brought him to Jerusalem, and he set him on the parapet of the temple, and he said to him: “If you are the Son of God, cast yourself down from here.
Luke 4:10	For it is written that he has given his Angels charge over you, so that they may guard you,
Luke 4:11	and so that they may take you into their hands, lest perhaps you may hurt your foot against a stone.”
Luke 4:12	And in response, Jesus said to him, “It is said: ‘You shall not tempt the Lord your God.’ ”
Luke 4:13	And when all the temptation was completed, the devil withdrew from him, until a time.
Luke 4:14	And Jesus returned, in the power of the Spirit, into Galilee. And his fame spread throughout the entire region.
Luke 4:15	And he taught in their synagogues, and he was magnified by everyone.
Luke 4:16	And he went to Nazareth, where he had been raised. And he entered into the synagogue, according to his custom, on the Sabbath day. And he rose up to read.
Luke 4:17	And the book of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him. And as he unrolled the book, he found the place where it was written:
Luke 4:18	“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me; because of this, he has anointed me. He has sent me to evangelize the poor, to heal the contrite of heart,
Luke 4:19	to preach forgiveness to captives and sight to the blind, to release the broken into forgiveness, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord and the day of retribution.”
Luke 4:20	And when he had rolled up the book, he returned it to the minister, and he sat down. And the eyes of everyone in the synagogue were fixed on him.
Luke 4:21	Then he began to say to them, “On this day, this scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing.”
Luke 4:22	And everyone gave testimony to him. And they wondered at the words of grace that proceeded from his mouth. And they said, “Is this not the son of Joseph?”
Luke 4:23	And he said to them: “Certainly, you will recite to me this saying, ‘Physician, heal yourself.’ The many great things that we have heard were done in Capernaum, do here also in your own country.”
Luke 4:24	Then he said: “Amen I say to you, that no prophet is accepted in his own country.
Luke 4:25	In truth, I say to you, there were many widows in the days of Elijah in Israel, when the heavens were closed for three years and six months, when a great famine had occurred throughout the entire land.
Luke 4:26	And to none of these was Elijah sent, except to Zarephath of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow.
Luke 4:27	And there were many lepers in Israel under the prophet Elisha. And none of these was cleansed, except Naaman the Syrian.”
Luke 4:28	And all those in the synagogue, upon hearing these things, were filled with anger.
Luke 4:29	And they rose up and drove him beyond the city. And they brought him all the way to the edge of the mount, upon which their city had been built, so that they might thrown him down violently.
Luke 4:30	But passing through their midst, he went away.
Luke 4:31	And he descended to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. And there he taught them on the Sabbaths.
Luke 4:32	And they were astonished at his doctrine, for his word was spoken with authority.
Luke 4:33	And in the synagogue, there was a man who had an unclean demon, and he cried out with a loud voice,
Luke 4:34	saying: “Let us alone. What are we to you, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know you who you are: the Holy One of God.”
Luke 4:35	And Jesus rebuked him, saying, “Be silent and depart from him.” And when the demon had thrown him into their midst, he departed from him, and he no longer harmed him.
Luke 4:36	And fear fell over them all. And they discussed this among themselves, saying: “What is this word? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they depart.”
Luke 4:37	And his fame spread to every place in the region.
Luke 4:38	Then Jesus, rising up from the synagogue, entered into the house of Simon. Now Simon’s mother-in-law was in the grip of a severe fever. And they petitioned him on her behalf.
Luke 4:39	And standing over her, he commanded the fever, and it left her. And promptly rising up, she ministered to them.
Luke 4:40	Then, when the sun had set, all those who had anyone afflicted with various diseases brought them to him. Then, laying his hands on each one of them, he cured them.
Luke 4:41	Now demons departed from many of them, crying out and saying, “You are the son of God.” And rebuking them, he would not permit them to speak. For they knew him to be the Christ.
Luke 4:42	Then, when it was daytime, going out, he went to a deserted place. And the crowds sought him, and they went all the way to him. And they detained him, so that he would not depart from them.
Luke 4:43	And he said to them, “I must also preach the kingdom of God to other cities, because it was for this reason that I was sent.”
Luke 4:44	And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.
Luke 5:1	Now it happened that, when the crowds pressed toward him, so that they might hear the word of God, he was standing beside the lake of Genesaret.
Luke 5:2	And he saw two boats standing beside the lake. But the fishermen had climbed down, and they were washing their nets.
Luke 5:3	And so, climbing into one of the boats, which belonged to Simon, he asked him to draw back a little from the land. And sitting down, he taught the crowds from the boat.
Luke 5:4	Then, when he had ceased speaking, he said to Simon, “Lead us into deep water, and release your nets for a catch.”
Luke 5:5	And in response, Simon said to him: “Teacher, working throughout the night, we caught nothing. But on your word, I will release the net.”
Luke 5:6	And when they had done this, they enclosed such a copious multitude of fish that their net was rupturing.
Luke 5:7	And they signaled to their associates, who were in the other boat, so that they would come and help them. And they came and filled both boats, so that they were nearly submerged.
Luke 5:8	But when Simon Peter had seen this, he fell down at the knees of Jesus, saying, “Depart from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man.”
Luke 5:9	For astonishment had enveloped him, and all who were with him, at the catch of fish that they had taken.
Luke 5:10	Now the same was true of James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were associates of Simon. And Jesus said to Simon: “Do not be afraid. From now on, you will be catching men.”
Luke 5:11	And having led their boats to land, leaving behind everything, they followed him.
Luke 5:12	And it happened that, while he was in a certain city, behold, there was a man full of leprosy who, upon seeing Jesus and falling to his face, petitioned him, saying: “Lord, if you are willing, you are able to cleanse me.”
Luke 5:13	And extending his hand, he touched him, saying: “I am willing. Be cleansed.” And at once, the leprosy departed from him.
Luke 5:14	And he instructed him that he should tell no one, “But go, show yourself to the priest, and make the offering for your cleansing, just as Moses has commanded, as a testimony for them.”
Luke 5:15	Yet word of him traveled around all the more. And great crowds came together, so that they might listen and be cured by him from their infirmities.
Luke 5:16	And he withdrew into the desert and prayed.
Luke 5:17	And it happened, on a certain day, that he again sat down, teaching. And there were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting nearby, who had come from every town of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem. And the power of the Lord was present, to heal them.
Luke 5:18	And behold, some men were carrying in the bed of a man who was paralyzed. And they sought a way to bring him in, and to place him before him.
Luke 5:19	And not finding a way by which they might bring him in, because of the crowd, they climbed up to the roof, and they let him down through the roof tiles with his bed, into their midst, in front of Jesus.
Luke 5:20	And when he saw his faith, he said, “Man, your sins are forgiven you.”
Luke 5:21	And the scribes and Pharisees began to think, saying: “Who is this, who is speaking blasphemies? Who is able to forgive sins, except God alone?”
Luke 5:22	But when Jesus realized their thoughts, responding, he said to them: “What are you thinking in your hearts?
Luke 5:23	Which is easier to say: ‘Your sins are forgiven you,’ or to say, ‘Rise up and walk?’
Luke 5:24	But so that you may know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins,” he said to the paralytic, “I say to you to: Rise up, take up your bed, and go into your house.”
Luke 5:25	And at once, rising up in their sight, he took up the bed on which he was lying, and he went away to his own house, magnifying God.
Luke 5:26	And astonishment took hold of everyone, and they were magnifying God. And they were filled with fear, saying: “For we have seen miracles today.”
Luke 5:27	And after these things, he went out, and he saw a tax collector named Levi, sitting at the customs office. And he said to him, “Follow me.”
Luke 5:28	And leaving behind everything, rising up, he followed him.
Luke 5:29	And Levi made a great feast for him in his own house. And there was a large crowd of tax collectors and others, who were sitting at table with them.
Luke 5:30	But the Pharisees and scribes were murmuring, saying to his disciples, “Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
Luke 5:31	And responding, Jesus said to them: “It is not those who are well who need a doctor, but those who have maladies.
Luke 5:32	I have not come to call the just, but sinners to repentance.”
Luke 5:33	But they said to him, “Why do the disciples of John fast frequently, and make supplications, and those of the Pharisees act similarly, while yours eat and drink?”
Luke 5:34	And he said to them: “How can you cause the sons of the groom to fast, while the groom is still with them?
Luke 5:35	But the days will come when the groom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast, in those days.”
Luke 5:36	Then he also made a comparison for them: “For no one sews a patch from a new garment onto an old garment. Otherwise, he both disrupts the new one, and the patch from the new one does not join together with the old one.
Luke 5:37	And no one puts new wine into old wineskins. Otherwise, the new wine ruptures the wineskins, and it will be poured out, and the wineskins will be lost.
Luke 5:38	Instead, the new wine is put into new wineskins, and both are preserved.
Luke 5:39	And no one who is drinking the old, soon wishes for the new. For he says, ‘The old is better.’ ”
Luke 6:1	Now it happened that, on the second first Sabbath, as he passed through the grain field, his disciples were separating the ears of grain and eating them, by rubbing them in their hands.
Luke 6:2	Then certain Pharisees said to them, “Why are you doing what is not lawful on the Sabbaths?”
Luke 6:3	And responding to them, Jesus said: “Have you not read this, what David did when he was hungry, and those who were with him?
Luke 6:4	How he entered into the house of God, and took the bread of the Presence, and ate it, and gave it to those who were with him, though it is not lawful for anyone to eat it, except the priests alone?”
Luke 6:5	And he said to them, “For the Son of man is Lord, even of the Sabbath.”
Luke 6:6	And it happened that, on another Sabbath, he entered into the synagogue, and he taught. And there was a man there, and his right hand was withered.
Luke 6:7	And the scribes and Pharisees observed whether he would heal on the Sabbath, so that they might thereby find an accusation against him.
Luke 6:8	Yet truly, he knew their thoughts, and so he said to the man who had the withered hand, “Rise up and stand in the middle.” And rising up, he stood still.
Luke 6:9	Then Jesus said to them: “I ask you if it is lawful on the Sabbaths to do good, or to do evil? To give health to a life, or to destroy it?”
Luke 6:10	And looking around at everyone, he said to the man, “Extend your hand.” And he extended it. And his hand was restored.
Luke 6:11	Then they were filled with madness, and they discussed with one another, what, in particular, they might do about Jesus.
Luke 6:12	And it happened that, in those days, he went out to a mountain to pray. And he was in the prayer of God throughout the night.
Luke 6:13	And when daylight had arrived, he called his disciples. And he chose twelve out of them (whom he also named Apostles):
Luke 6:14	Simon, whom he surnamed Peter, and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew,
Luke 6:15	Matthew and Thomas, James of Alphaeus, and Simon who is called the Zealot,
Luke 6:16	and Jude of James, and Judas Iscariot, who was a traitor.
Luke 6:17	And descending with them, he stood in a level place with a multitude of his disciples, and a copious multitude of people from all of Judea and Jerusalem and the seacoast, and Tyre and Sidon,
Luke 6:18	who had come so that they might listen to him and be healed of their diseases. And those who were troubled by unclean spirits were cured.
Luke 6:19	And the entire crowd was trying to touch him, because power went out from him and healed all.
Luke 6:20	And lifting up his eyes to his disciples, he said: “Blessed are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.
Luke 6:21	Blessed are you who are hungry now, for you shall be satisfied. Blessed are you who are weeping now, for you shall laugh.
Luke 6:22	Blessed shall you be when men will have hated you, and when they will have separated you and reproached you, and thrown out your name as if evil, because of the Son of man.
Luke 6:23	Be glad in that day and exult. For behold, your reward is great in heaven. For these same things their fathers did to the prophets.
Luke 6:24	Yet truly, woe to you who are wealthy, for you have your consolation.
Luke 6:25	Woe to you who are satisfied, for you will be hungry. Woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
Luke 6:26	Woe to you when men will have blessed you. For these same things their fathers did to the false prophets.
Luke 6:27	But I say to you who are listening: Love your enemies. Do good to those who hate you.
Luke 6:28	Bless those who curse you, and pray for those who slander you.
Luke 6:29	And to him who strikes you on the cheek, offer the other also. And from him who takes away your coat, do not withhold even your tunic.
Luke 6:30	But distribute to all who ask of you. And do not ask again of him who takes away what is yours.
Luke 6:31	And exactly as you would want people to treat you, treat them also the same.
Luke 6:32	And if you love those who love you, what credit is due to you? For even sinners love those who love them.
Luke 6:33	And if you will do good to those who do good to you, what credit is due to you? Indeed, even sinners behave this way.
Luke 6:34	And if you will loan to those from whom you hope to receive, what credit is due to you? For even sinners lend to sinners, in order to receive the same in return.
Luke 6:35	So truly, love your enemies. Do good, and lend, hoping for nothing in return. And then your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, for he himself is kind to the ungrateful and to the wicked.
Luke 6:36	Therefore, be merciful, just as your Father is also merciful.
Luke 6:37	Do not judge, and you will not be judged. Do not condemn, and you will not be condemned. Forgive, and you will be forgiven.
Luke 6:38	Give, and it will be given to you: a good measure, pressed down and shaken together and overflowing, they will place upon your lap. Certainly, the same measure that you use to measure out, will be used to measure back to you again.”
Luke 6:39	Now he told them another comparison: “How can the blind lead the blind? Would they not both fall into a pit?
Luke 6:40	The disciple is not above his teacher. But each one will be perfected, if he is like his teacher.
Luke 6:41	And why do you see the straw that is in your brother’s eye, while the log that is in your own eye, you do not consider?
Luke 6:42	Or how can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, allow me to remove the straw from your eye,’ while you yourself do not see the log in your own eye? Hypocrite, first remove the log from your own eye, and then will you see clearly, so that you may lead out the straw from your brother’s eye.
Luke 6:43	For there is no good tree which produces bad fruit, nor does an evil tree produce good fruit.
Luke 6:44	For each and every tree is known by its fruit. For they do not gather figs from thorns, nor do they gather the grape from the bramble bush.
Luke 6:45	A good man, from the good storehouse of his heart, offers what is good. And an evil man, from the evil storehouse, offers what is evil. For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.
Luke 6:46	But why do you call me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ and not do what I say?
Luke 6:47	Anyone who comes to me, and listens to my words, and does them: I will reveal to you what he is like.
Luke 6:48	He is like a man building a house, who has dug deep and has laid the foundation upon the rock. Then, when the floodwaters came, the river was rushing against that house, and it was not able to move it. For it was founded upon the rock.
Luke 6:49	But whoever hears and does not do: he is like a man building his house upon the soil, without a foundation. The river rushed against it, and it soon fell down, and the ruin of that house was great.”
Luke 7:1	And when he had completed all his words in the hearing of the people, he entered Capernaum.
Luke 7:2	Now the servant of a certain centurion was dying, due to an illness. And he was very dear to him.
Luke 7:3	And when he had heard about Jesus, he sent elders of the Jews to him, petitioning him, so that he would come and heal his servant.
Luke 7:4	And when they had come to Jesus, they petitioned him anxiously, saying to him: “He is worthy that you should provide this to him.
Luke 7:5	For he loves our nation, and he has built a synagogue for us.”
Luke 7:6	Then Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying: “Lord, do not trouble yourself. For I am not worthy that you should enter under my roof.
Luke 7:7	Because of this, I also did not consider myself worthy to come to you. But say the word, and my servant shall be healed.
Luke 7:8	For I also am a man placed under authority, having soldiers under me. And I say to one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
Luke 7:9	And upon hearing this, Jesus was amazed. And turning to the multitude following him, he said, “Amen I say to you, not even in Israel have I found such great faith.”
Luke 7:10	And those who had been sent, upon returning to the house, found that the servant, who had been sick, was now healthy.
Luke 7:11	And it happened afterwards that he went to a city, which is called Nain. And his disciples, and an abundant crowd, went with him.
Luke 7:12	Then, when he had drawn near to the gate of the city, behold, a deceased person was being carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. And a large crowd from the city was with her.
Luke 7:13	And when the Lord had seen her, being moved by mercy over her, he said to her, “Do not weep.”
Luke 7:14	And he drew near and touched the coffin. Then those who carried it stood still. And he said, “Young man, I say to you, arise.”
Luke 7:15	And the dead youth sat up and began to speak. And he gave him to his mother.
Luke 7:16	Then fear fell over all of them. And they magnified God, saying: “For a great prophet has risen up among us,” and, “For God has visited his people.”
Luke 7:17	And this word about him went out to all of Judea and to the entire surrounding region.
Luke 7:18	And the disciples of John reported to him concerning all these things.
Luke 7:19	And John called two of his disciples, and he sent them to Jesus, saying, “Are you he who is to come, or should we wait for another?”
Luke 7:20	But when the men had come to him, they said: “John the Baptist has sent us to you, saying: ‘Are you he who is to come, or should we wait for another?’ ”
Luke 7:21	Now in that same hour, he cured many of their diseases and wounds and evil spirits; and to many of the blind, he gave sight.
Luke 7:22	And responding, he said to them: “Go and report to John what you have heard and seen: that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise again, the poor are evangelized.
Luke 7:23	And blessed is anyone who has not taken offense at me.”
Luke 7:24	And when the messengers of John had withdrawn, he began to speak about John to the crowds. “What did you go out to the desert to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
Luke 7:25	Then what did you go out to see? A man clothed in soft garments? Behold, those who are in costly apparel and finery are in the houses of kings.
Luke 7:26	Then what did you go out to see? A prophet? Certainly, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
Luke 7:27	This is he of whom it is written: “Behold, I send my Angel before your face, who shall prepare your way before you.”
Luke 7:28	For I say to you, among those born of women, no one is greater than the prophet John the Baptist. But he who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.”
Luke 7:29	And upon hearing this, all the people and the tax collectors justified God, by being baptized with the baptism of John.
Luke 7:30	But the Pharisees and the experts in the law despised the counsel of God concerning themselves, by not being baptized by him.
Luke 7:31	Then the Lord said: “Therefore, to what shall I compare the men of this generation? And to what are they similar?
Luke 7:32	They are like children sitting in the marketplace, talking with one another, and saying: ‘We sang to you, and you did not dance. We lamented, and you did not weep.’
Luke 7:33	For John the Baptist came, neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon.’
Luke 7:34	The Son of man came, eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Behold, a voracious man and a drinker of wine, a friend of tax collectors and of sinners.’
Luke 7:35	But wisdom is justified by all her children.”
Luke 7:36	Then certain Pharisees petitioned him, so that they might eat with him. And he went into the house of the Pharisee, and he reclined at table.
Luke 7:37	And behold, a woman who was in the city, a sinner, found out that he was reclining at table in the house of the Pharisee, so she brought an alabaster container of ointment.
Luke 7:38	And standing behind him, beside his feet, she began to wash his feet with tears, and she wiped them with the hair of her head, and she kissed his feet, and she anointed them with ointment.
Luke 7:39	Then the Pharisee, who had invited him, upon seeing this, spoke within himself, saying, “This man, if he were a prophet, would certainly know who and what kind of woman is this, who is touching him: that she is a sinner.”
Luke 7:40	And in response, Jesus said to him, “Simon, I have something to say to you.” So he said, “Speak, Teacher.”
Luke 7:41	“A certain creditor had two debtors: one owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
Luke 7:42	And since they did not have the ability to repay him, he forgave them both. So then, which of them loves him more?”
Luke 7:43	In response, Simon said, “I suppose that it is he to whom he forgave the most.” And he said to him, “You have judged correctly.”
Luke 7:44	And turning to the woman, he said to Simon: “Do you see this woman? I entered into your house. You gave me no water for my feet. But she has washed my feet with tears, and has wiped them with her hair.
Luke 7:45	You gave no kiss to me. But she, from the time that she entered, has not ceased to kiss my feet.
Luke 7:46	You did not anoint my head with oil. But she has anointed my feet with ointment.
Luke 7:47	Because of this, I tell you: many sins are forgiven her, because she has loved much. But he who is forgiven less, loves less.”
Luke 7:48	Then he said to her, “Your sins are forgiven you.”
Luke 7:49	And those who sat at table with him began to say within themselves, “Who is this, who even forgives sins?”
Luke 7:50	Then he said to the woman: “Your faith has brought you salvation. Go in peace.”
Luke 8:1	And it happened afterwards that he was making a journey through the cities and towns, preaching and evangelizing the kingdom of God. And the twelve were with him,
Luke 8:2	along with certain women who had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary, who is called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had departed,
Luke 8:3	and Joanna, the wife of Chuza, Herod’s steward, and Susanna, and many other women, who were ministering to him from their resources.
Luke 8:4	Then, when a very numerous crowd was gathering together and hurrying from the cities to him, he spoke using a comparison:
Luke 8:5	“The sower went out to sow his seed. And as he sowed, some fell beside the way; and it was trampled and the birds of the air devoured it.
Luke 8:6	And some fell upon rock; and having sprung up, it withered away, because it had no moisture.
Luke 8:7	And some fell among thorns; and the thorns, rising up with it, suffocated it.
Luke 8:8	And some fell upon good soil; and having sprung up, it produced fruit one hundredfold.” As he said these things, he cried out, “Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Luke 8:9	Then his disciples questioned him as to what this parable might mean.
Luke 8:10	And he said to them: “To you it has been given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God. But to the rest, it is in parables, so that: seeing, they may not perceive, and hearing, they may not understand.
Luke 8:11	Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.
Luke 8:12	And those beside the way are those who hear it, but then the devil comes and takes the word from their heart, lest by believing it they may be saved.
Luke 8:13	Now those upon rock are those who, when they hear it, accept the word with joy, but these have no roots. So they believe for a time, but in a time of testing, they fall away.
Luke 8:14	And those which fell among thorns are those who have heard it, but as they go along, they are suffocated by the concerns and riches and pleasures of this life, and so they do not yield fruit.
Luke 8:15	But those which were on good soil are those who, upon hearing the word with a good and noble heart, retain it, and they bring forth fruit in patience.
Luke 8:16	Now no one, lighting a candle, covers it with a container, or sets it under a bed. Instead, he places it on a lampstand, so that those who enter may see the light.
Luke 8:17	For there is nothing secret, which will not be made clear, nor is there anything hidden, which will not be known and be brought into plain sight.
Luke 8:18	Therefore, take care how you listen. For whoever has, it will be given to him; and whoever does not have, even what he thinks he has will be taken away from him.”
Luke 8:19	Then his mother and brothers came to him; but they were not able to go to him because of the crowd.
Luke 8:20	And it was reported to him, “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.”
Luke 8:21	And in response, he said to them, “My mother and my brothers are those who hear the word of God and do it.”
Luke 8:22	Now it happened, on a certain day, that he climbed into a little boat with his disciples. And he said to them, “Let us make a crossing over the lake.” And they embarked.
Luke 8:23	And as they were sailing, he slept. And a windstorm descended over the lake. And they were taking on water and were in danger.
Luke 8:24	Then, drawing near, they awakened him, saying, “Teacher, we are perishing.” But as he rose up, he rebuked the wind and the raging water, and they ceased. And a tranquility occurred.
Luke 8:25	Then he said to them, “Where is your faith?” And they, being afraid, were amazed, saying to one another, “Who do you think this is, so that he commands both wind and sea, and they obey him?”
Luke 8:26	And they sailed to the region of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee.
Luke 8:27	And when he had gone out to the land, a certain man met him, who had now had a demon for a long time. And he did not wear clothes, nor did he stay in a house, but among the sepulchers.
Luke 8:28	And when he saw Jesus, he fell down before him. And crying out in a loud voice, he said: “What is there between me and you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you not to torture me.”
Luke 8:29	For he was ordering the unclean spirit to depart from the man. For on many occasions, it would seize him, and he was bound with chains and held by fetters. But breaking the chains, he was driven by the demon into deserted places.
Luke 8:30	Then Jesus questioned him, saying, “What is your name?” And he said, “Legion,” because many demons had entered into him.
Luke 8:31	And they petitioned him not to order them to go into the abyss.
Luke 8:32	And in that place, there was a herd of many swine, pasturing on the mountain. And they petitioned him to permit them to enter into them. And he permitted them.
Luke 8:33	Therefore, the demons departed from the man, and they entered into the swine. And the herd rushed violently down a precipice into the lake, and they were drowned.
Luke 8:34	And when those who were pasturing them had seen this, they fled and reported it in the city and the villages.
Luke 8:35	Then they went out to see what was happening, and they came to Jesus. And they found the man, from whom the demons had departed, sitting at his feet, clothed as well as in a sane mind, and they were afraid.
Luke 8:36	Then those who had seen this also reported to them how he had been healed from the legion.
Luke 8:37	And the entire multitude from the region of the Gerasenes pleaded with him to depart from them. For they were seized by a great fear. Then, climbing into the boat, he went back again.
Luke 8:38	And the man from whom the demons had departed pleaded with him, so that he might be with him. But Jesus sent him away, saying,
Luke 8:39	“Return to your house and explain to them what great things God has done for you.” And he traveled through the entire city, preaching about the great things that Jesus had done for him.
Luke 8:40	Now it happened that, when Jesus had returned, the crowd received him. For they were all waiting for him.
Luke 8:41	And behold, a man came, whose name was Jairus, and he was a leader of the synagogue. And he fell down at the feet of Jesus, asking him to enter into his house.
Luke 8:42	For he had an only daughter, nearly twelve years old, and she was dying. And it happened that, as he was going there, he was hemmed in by the crowd.
Luke 8:43	And there was a certain woman, with a flow of blood for twelve years, who had paid out all her substance on physicians, and she was unable to be cured by any of them.
Luke 8:44	She approached him from behind, and she touched the hem of his garment. And at once the flow of her blood stopped.
Luke 8:45	And Jesus said, “Who is it that touched me?” But as everyone was denying it, Peter, and those who were with him, said: “Teacher, the crowd hems you in and presses upon you, and yet you say, ‘Who touched me?’ ”
Luke 8:46	And Jesus said: “Someone has touched me. For I know that power has gone out from me.”
Luke 8:47	Then the woman, upon seeing that she was not hidden, came forward, trembling, and she fell down before his feet. And she declared before all the people the reason that she had touched him, and how she had been immediately healed.
Luke 8:48	But he said to her: “Daughter, your faith has saved you. Go in peace.”
Luke 8:49	While he was still speaking, someone came to the ruler of the synagogue, saying to him: “Your daughter is dead. Do not trouble him.”
Luke 8:50	Then Jesus, upon hearing this word, replied to the father of the girl: “Do not be afraid. Only believe, and she will be saved.”
Luke 8:51	And when he had arrived at the house, he would not permit anyone to enter with him, except Peter and James and John, and the father and mother of the girl.
Luke 8:52	Now all were weeping and mourning for her. But he said: “Do not weep. The girl is not dead, but only sleeping.”
Luke 8:53	And they derided him, knowing that she had died.
Luke 8:54	But he, taking her by the hand, cried out, saying, “Little girl, arise.”
Luke 8:55	And her spirit returned, and she immediately rose up. And he ordered them to give her something to eat.
Luke 8:56	And her parents were stupefied. And he instructed them not to tell anyone what had happened.
Luke 9:1	Then calling together the twelve Apostles, he gave them power and authority over all demons and to cure diseases.
Luke 9:2	And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God and to heal the infirm.
Luke 9:3	And he said to them: “You should take nothing for the journey, neither staff, nor traveling bag, nor bread, nor money; and you should not have two tunics.
Luke 9:4	And into whatever house you shall enter, lodge there, and do not move away from there.
Luke 9:5	And whoever will not have received you, upon departing from that city, shake off even the dust on your feet, as a testimony against them.”
Luke 9:6	And going forth, they traveled around, through the towns, evangelizing and curing everywhere.
Luke 9:7	Now Herod the tetrarch heard about all the things that were being done by him, but he doubted, because it was said
Luke 9:8	by some, “For John has risen from the dead,” yet truly, by others, “For Elijah has appeared,” and by still others, “For one of the prophets from of old has risen again.”
Luke 9:9	And Herod said: “I beheaded John. So then, who is this, about whom I hear such things?” And he sought to see him.
Luke 9:10	And when the Apostles returned, they explained to him all the things that they had done. And taking them with him, he withdrew to a deserted place apart, which belongs to Bethsaida.
Luke 9:11	But when the crowd had realized this, they followed him. And he received them and spoke to them about the kingdom of God. And those who were in need of cures, he healed.
Luke 9:12	Then the day began to decline. And drawing near, the twelve said to him: “Dismiss the crowds, so that, by going into the surrounding towns and villages, they may separate and find food. For we are here in a deserted place.”
Luke 9:13	But he said to them, “You give them something to eat.” And they said, “There is with us no more than five loaves and two fish, unless perhaps we are to go and buy food for this entire multitude.”
Luke 9:14	Now there were about five thousand men. So he said to his disciples, “Have them recline to eat in groups of fifty.”
Luke 9:15	And they did so. And they caused them all to recline to eat.
Luke 9:16	Then, taking the five loaves and the two fish, he gazed up to heaven, and he blessed and broke and distributed them to his disciples, in order to set them before the crowd.
Luke 9:17	And they all ate and were satisfied. And twelve baskets of fragments were taken up, which were left over from them.
Luke 9:18	And it happened that, when he was praying alone, his disciples also were with him, and he questioned them, saying: “Who do the multitudes say that I am?”
Luke 9:19	But they answered by saying: “John the Baptist. But some say Elijah. Yet truly, others say that one of the prophets from before has risen again.”
Luke 9:20	Then he said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” In response, Simon Peter said, “The Christ of God.”
Luke 9:21	But speaking sharply to them, he instructed them not to tell this to anyone,
Luke 9:22	saying, “For the Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders and the leaders of the priests and the scribes, and be killed, and on the third day rise again.”
Luke 9:23	Then he said to everyone: “If anyone is willing to come after me: let him deny himself, and take up his cross every day, and follow me.
Luke 9:24	For whoever will have saved his life, will lose it. Yet whoever will have lost his life for my sake, will save it.
Luke 9:25	For how does it benefit a man, if he were to gain the whole world, yet lose himself, or cause himself harm?
Luke 9:26	For whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words: of him the Son of man will be ashamed, when he will have arrived in his majesty and that of his Father and of the holy Angels.
Luke 9:27	And yet, I tell you a truth: There are some standing here who shall not taste death, until they see the kingdom of God.”
Luke 9:28	And it happened that, about eight days after these words, he took Peter and James and John, and he ascended onto a mountain, so that he might pray.
Luke 9:29	And while he was praying, the appearance of his countenance was altered, and his vestment became white and shining.
Luke 9:30	And behold, two men were talking with him. And these were Moses and Elijah, appearing in majesty.
Luke 9:31	And they spoke of his departure, which he would accomplish at Jerusalem.
Luke 9:32	Yet truly, Peter and those who were with him were weighed down by sleep. And becoming alert, they saw his majesty and the two men who were standing with him.
Luke 9:33	And it happened that, as these were departing from him, Peter said to Jesus: “Teacher, it is good for us to be here. And so, let us make three tabernacles: one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” For he did not know what he was saying.
Luke 9:34	Then, as he was saying these things, a cloud came and overshadowed them. And as these were entering into the cloud, they were afraid.
Luke 9:35	And a voice came from the cloud, saying: “This is my beloved son. Listen to him.”
Luke 9:36	And while the voice was being uttered, Jesus was found to be alone. And they were silent and told no one, in those days, any of these things, which they had seen.
Luke 9:37	But it happened on the following day that, as they were descending from the mountain, a great crowd met him.
Luke 9:38	And behold, a man from the crowd cried out, saying, “Teacher, I beg you, look kindly on my son, for he is my only son.
Luke 9:39	And behold, a spirit takes hold of him, and he suddenly cries out, and it throws him down and convulses him, so that he foams. And though it tears him apart, it leaves him only with difficulty.
Luke 9:40	And I asked your disciples to cast him out, and they were unable.”
Luke 9:41	And in response, Jesus said: “O unfaithful and perverse generation! How long will I be with you and endure you? Bring your son here.”
Luke 9:42	And as he was approaching him, the demon threw him down and convulsed him.
Luke 9:43	And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and he healed the boy, and he restored him to his father.
Luke 9:44	And all were astonished at the greatness of God. And as everyone was wondering over all that he was doing, he said to his disciples: “You must set these words in your hearts. For it shall be that the Son of man will be delivered into the hands of men.”
Luke 9:45	But they did not understood this word, and it was concealed from them, so that they did not perceive it. And they were afraid to question him about this word.
Luke 9:46	Now an idea entered into them, as to which of them was greater.
Luke 9:47	But Jesus, perceiving the thoughts of their hearts, took a child and stood him beside him.
Luke 9:48	And he said to them: “Whoever will receive this child in my name, receives me; and whoever receives me, receives him who sent me. For whoever is the lesser among you all, the same is greater.”
Luke 9:49	And responding, John said: “Teacher, we saw a certain one casting out demons in your name. And we prohibited him, for he does not follow with us.”
Luke 9:50	And Jesus said to him: “Do not prohibit him. For whoever is not against you, is for you.”
Luke 9:51	Now it happened that, while the days of his dissipation were being completed, he steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem.
Luke 9:52	And he sent messengers before his face. And going on, they entered into a city of the Samaritans, to prepare for him.
Luke 9:53	And they would not receive him, because his face was going toward Jerusalem.
Luke 9:54	And when his disciples, James and John, had seen this, they said, “Lord, do you want us to call for fire to descend from heaven and consume them?”
Luke 9:55	And turning, he rebuked them, saying: “Do you not know of whose spirit you are?
Luke 9:56	The Son of man came, not to destroy lives, but to save them.” And they went into another town.
Luke 9:57	And it happened that, as they were walking along the way, someone said to him, “I will follow you, wherever you will go.”
Luke 9:58	Jesus said to him: “Foxes have dens, and the birds of the air have nests. But the Son of man has nowhere to lay his head.”
Luke 9:59	Then he said to another, “Follow me.” But he said, “Lord, permit me first to go and bury my father.”
Luke 9:60	And Jesus said to him: “Let the dead bury their dead. But you go and announce the kingdom of God.”
Luke 9:61	And another said: “I will follow you, Lord. But permit me first to explain this to those of my house.”
Luke 9:62	Jesus said to him, “No one who puts his hand to the plow, and then looks back, is fit for the kingdom of God.”
Luke 10:1	Then, after these things, the Lord also designated another seventy-two. And he sent them in pairs before his face, into every city and place where he was to arrive.
Luke 10:2	And he said to them: “Certainly the harvest is great, but the workers are few. Therefore, ask the Lord of the harvest to send workers into his harvest.
Luke 10:3	Go forth. Behold, I send you out like lambs among wolves.
Luke 10:4	Do not choose to carry a purse, nor provisions, nor shoes; and you shall greet no one along the way.
Luke 10:5	Into whatever house you will have entered, first say, ‘Peace to this house.’
Luke 10:6	And if a son of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him. But if not, it will return to you.
Luke 10:7	And remain in the same house, eating and drinking the things that are with them. For the worker is worthy of his pay. Do not choose to pass from house to house.
Luke 10:8	And into whatever city you have entered and they have received you, eat what they set before you.
Luke 10:9	And cure the sick who are in that place, and proclaim to them, ‘The kingdom of God has drawn near to you.’
Luke 10:10	But into whatever city you have entered and they have not received you, going out into its main streets, say:
Luke 10:11	‘Even the dust which clings to us from your city, we wipe away against you. Yet know this: the kingdom of God has drawn near.’
Luke 10:12	I say to you, that in that day, Sodom will be forgiven more than that city will be.
Luke 10:13	Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles that have been wrought in you, had been wrought in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in haircloth and ashes.
Luke 10:14	Yet truly, Tyre and Sidon will be forgiven more in the judgment than you will be.
Luke 10:15	And as for you, Capernaum, who would be exalted even up to Heaven: you shall be submerged into Hell.
Luke 10:16	Whoever hears you, hears me. And whoever despises you, despises me. And whoever despises me, despises him who sent me.”
Luke 10:17	Then the seventy-two returned with gladness, saying, “Lord, even the demons are subject to us, in your name.”
Luke 10:18	And he said to them: “I was watching as Satan fell like lightning from heaven.
Luke 10:19	Behold, I have given you authority to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the powers of the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you.
Luke 10:20	Yet truly, do not choose to rejoice in this, that the spirits are subject to you; but rejoice that your names are written in heaven.”
Luke 10:21	In the same hour, he exulted in the Holy Spirit, and he said: “I confess to you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and the prudent, and have revealed them to little ones. It is so, Father, because this way was pleasing before you.
Luke 10:22	All things have been delivered to me by my Father. And no one knows who the Son is, except the Father, and who the Father is, except the Son, and those to whom the Son has chosen to reveal him.”
Luke 10:23	And turning to his disciples, he said: “Blessed are the eyes that see what you see.
Luke 10:24	For I say to you, that many prophets and kings wanted to see the things that you see, and they did not see them, and to hear the things that you hear, and they did not hear them.”
Luke 10:25	And behold, a certain expert in the law rose up, testing him and saying, “Teacher, what must I do to possess eternal life?”
Luke 10:26	But he said to him: “What is written in the law? How do you read it?”
Luke 10:27	In response, he said: “You shall love the Lord your God from your whole heart, and from your whole soul, and from all your strength, and from all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself.”
Luke 10:28	And he said to him: “You have answered correctly. Do this, and you will live.”
Luke 10:29	But since he wanted to justify himself, he said to Jesus, “And who is my neighbor?”
Luke 10:30	Then Jesus, taking this up, said: “A certain man descended from Jerusalem to Jericho, and he happened upon robbers, who now also plundered him. And inflicting him with wounds, they went away, leaving him behind, half-alive.
Luke 10:31	And it happened that a certain priest was descending along the same way. And seeing him, he passed by.
Luke 10:32	And similarly a Levite, when he was near the place, also saw him, and he passed by.
Luke 10:33	But a certain Samaritan, being on a journey, came near him. And seeing him, he was moved by mercy.
Luke 10:34	And approaching him, he bound up his wounds, pouring oil and wine on them. And setting him on his pack animal, he brought him to an inn, and he took care of him.
Luke 10:35	And the next day, he took out two denarii, and he gave them to the proprietor, and he said: ‘Take care of him. And whatever extra you will have spent, I will repay to you at my return.’
Luke 10:36	Which of these three, does it seem to you, was a neighbor to him who fell among the robbers?”
Luke 10:37	Then he said, “The one who acted with mercy toward him.” And Jesus said to him, “Go, and act similarly.”
Luke 10:38	Now it happened that, while they were traveling, he entered into a certain town. And a certain woman, named Martha, received him into her home.
Luke 10:39	And she had a sister, named Mary, who, while sitting beside the Lord’s feet, was listening to his word.
Luke 10:40	Now Martha was continually busying herself with serving. And she stood still and said: “Lord, is it not a concern to you that my sister has left me to serve alone? Therefore, speak to her, so that she may help me.”
Luke 10:41	And the Lord responded by saying to her: “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled over many things.
Luke 10:42	And yet only one thing is necessary. Mary has chosen the best portion, and it shall not be taken away from her.”
Luke 11:1	And it happened that, while he was in a certain place praying, when he ceased, one of his disciples said to him, “Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples.”
Luke 11:2	And he said to them: “When you are praying, say: Father, may your name be kept holy. May your kingdom come.
Luke 11:3	Give us this day our daily bread.
Luke 11:4	And forgive us our sins, since we also forgive all who are indebted to us. And lead us not into temptation.”
Luke 11:5	And he said to them: “Which of you will have a friend and will go to him in the middle of the night, and will say to him: ‘Friend, lend me three loaves,
Luke 11:6	because a friend of mine has arrived from a journey to me, and I do not have anything to set before him.’
Luke 11:7	And from within, he would answer by saying: ‘Do not disturb me. The door is closed now, and my children and I are in bed. I cannot get up and give it to you.’
Luke 11:8	Yet if he will persevere in knocking, I tell you that, even though he would not get up and give it to him because he is a friend, yet due to his continued insistence, he will get up and give him whatever he needs.
Luke 11:9	And so I say to you: Ask, and it shall be given to you. Seek, and you shall find. Knock, and it shall be opened to you.
Luke 11:10	For everyone who asks, receives. And whoever seeks, finds. And whoever knocks, it shall be opened to him.
Luke 11:11	So then, who among you, if he asks his father for bread, he would give him a stone? Or if he asks for a fish, he would give him a serpent, instead of a fish?
Luke 11:12	Or if he will ask for an egg, he would offer to him a scorpion?
Luke 11:13	Therefore, if you, being evil, know how to give good things to your sons, how much more will your Father give, from heaven, a spirit of goodness to those who ask him?”
Luke 11:14	And he was casting out a demon, and the man was mute. But when he had cast out the demon, the mute man spoke, and so the crowds were amazed.
Luke 11:15	But some of them said, “It is by Beelzebub, the leader of demons, that he casts out demons.”
Luke 11:16	And others, testing him, required a sign from heaven of him.
Luke 11:17	But when he perceived their thoughts, he said to them: “Every kingdom divided against itself will become desolate, and house will fall upon house.
Luke 11:18	So then, if Satan is also divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say that it is by Beelzebub that I cast out demons.
Luke 11:19	But if I cast out demons by Beelzebub, by whom do your own sons cast them out? Therefore, they shall be your judges.
Luke 11:20	Moreover, if it is by the finger of God that I cast out demons, then certainly the kingdom of God has overtaken you.
Luke 11:21	When a strong armed man guards his entrance, the things that he possesses are at peace.
Luke 11:22	But if a stronger one, overwhelming him, has defeated him, he will take away all his weapons, in which he trusted, and he will distribute his spoils.
Luke 11:23	Whoever is not with me, is against me. And whoever does not gather with me, scatters.
Luke 11:24	When an unclean spirit has departed from a man, he walks through waterless places, seeking rest. And not finding any, he says: ‘I will return to my house, from which I departed.’
Luke 11:25	And when he has arrived, he finds it swept clean and decorated.
Luke 11:26	Then he goes, and he takes in seven other spirits with him, more wicked than himself, and they enter and live there. And so, the end of that man is made worse the beginning.”
Luke 11:27	And it happened that, when he was saying these things, a certain woman from the crowd, lifting up her voice, said to him, “Blessed is the womb that bore you and the breasts that nursed you.”
Luke 11:28	Then he said, “Yes, but moreover: blessed are those who hear the word of God and keep it.”
Luke 11:29	Then, as the crowds were quickly gathering, he began to say: “This generation is a wicked generation: it seeks a sign. But no sign will be given to it, except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
Luke 11:30	For just as Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites, so also will the Son of man be to this generation.
Luke 11:31	The queen of the South will rise up, at the judgment, with the men of this generation, and she will condemn them. For she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon. And behold, more than Solomon is here.
Luke 11:32	The men of Nineveh will rise up, at the judgment, with this generation, and they will condemn it. For at the preaching of Jonah, they repented. And behold, more than Jonah is here.
Luke 11:33	No one lights a candle and places it in hiding, nor under a bushel basket, but upon a lampstand, so that those who enter may see the light.
Luke 11:34	Your eye is the light of your body. If your eye is wholesome, your entire body will be filled with light. But if it is wicked, then even your body will be darkened.
Luke 11:35	Therefore, take care, lest the light that is within you become darkness.
Luke 11:36	So then, if your entire body becomes filled with light, not having any part in darkness, then it will be entirely light, and, like a shining lamp, it will illuminate you.”
Luke 11:37	And as he was speaking, a certain Pharisee asked him to eat with him. And going inside, he sat down to eat.
Luke 11:38	But the Pharisee began to say, thinking within himself: “Why might it be that he has not washed before eating?”
Luke 11:39	And the Lord said to him: “You Pharisees today clean what is outside the cup and the plate, but what is inside of you is full of plunder and iniquity.
Luke 11:40	Fools! Did not he who made what is outside, indeed also make what is inside?
Luke 11:41	Yet truly, give what is above as alms, and behold, all things are clean for you.
Luke 11:42	But woe to you, Pharisees! For you tithe mint and rue and every herb, but you ignore judgment and the charity of God. But these things you ought to have done, without omitting the others.
Luke 11:43	Woe to you, Pharisees! For you love the first seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the marketplace.
Luke 11:44	Woe to you! For you are like graves that are not noticeable, so that men walk over them without realizing it.”
Luke 11:45	Then one of the experts in the law, in response, said to him, “Teacher, in saying these things, you bring an insult against us as well.”
Luke 11:46	So he said: “And woe to you experts in the law! For you weigh men down with burdens which they are not able to bear, but you yourselves do not touch the weight with even one of your fingers.
Luke 11:47	Woe to you, who build the tombs of the prophets, while it is your fathers who killed them!
Luke 11:48	Clearly, you are testifying that you consent to the actions of your fathers, because even though they killed them, you build their sepulchers.
Luke 11:49	Because of this also, the wisdom of God said: I will send to them Prophets and Apostles, and some of these they will kill or persecute,
Luke 11:50	so that the blood of all the Prophets, which has been shed since the foundation of the world, may be charged against this generation:
Luke 11:51	from the blood of Abel, even to the blood of Zachariah, who perished between the altar and the sanctuary. So I say to you: it will be required of this generation!
Luke 11:52	Woe to you, experts in the law! For you have taken away the key of knowledge. You yourselves do not enter, and those who were entering, you would have prohibited.”
Luke 11:53	Then, while he was saying these things to them, the Pharisees and the experts in the law began to insist strongly that he restrain his mouth about many things.
Luke 11:54	And waiting to ambush him, they sought something from his mouth that they might seize upon, in order to accuse him.
Luke 12:1	Then, as great crowds were standing so close that they were stepping on one another, he began to say to his disciples: “Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
Luke 12:2	For there is nothing covered, which will not be revealed, nor anything hidden, which will not be known.
Luke 12:3	For the things that you have spoken in darkness will be declared in the light. And what you have said in the ear in bedrooms will be proclaimed from the housetops.
Luke 12:4	So I say to you, my friends: Do not be fearful of those who kill the body, and afterwards have no more that they can do.
Luke 12:5	But I will reveal to you whom you should fear. Fear him who, after he will have killed, has the power to cast into Hell. So I say to you: Fear him.
Luke 12:6	Are not five sparrows sold for two small coins? And yet not one of these is forgotten in the sight of God.
Luke 12:7	But even the very hairs of your head have all been numbered. Therefore, do not be afraid. You are worth more than many sparrows.
Luke 12:8	But I say to you: Everyone who will have confessed me before men, the Son of man will also confess him before the Angels of God.
Luke 12:9	But everyone who will have denied me before men, he will be denied before the Angels of God.
Luke 12:10	And everyone who speaks a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven of him. But of him who will have blasphemed against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven.
Luke 12:11	And when they will lead you to the synagogues, and to magistrates and authorities, do not choose to be worried about how or what you will answer, or about what you might say.
Luke 12:12	For the Holy Spirit will teach you, in the same hour, what you must say.”
Luke 12:13	And someone from the crowd said to him, “Teacher, tell my brother to share the inheritance with me.”
Luke 12:14	But he said to him, “Man, who has appointed me as judge or arbitrator over you?”
Luke 12:15	So he said to them: “Be cautious and wary of all avarice. For a person’s life is not found in the abundance of the things that he possesses.”
Luke 12:16	Then he spoke to them using a comparison, saying: “The fertile land of a certain wealthy man produced crops.
Luke 12:17	And he thought within himself, saying: ‘What should I do? For I have nowhere to gather together my crops.’
Luke 12:18	And he said: ‘This is what I will do. I will tear down my barns and build larger ones. And into these, I will gather all the things that have been grown for me, as well as my goods.
Luke 12:19	And I will say to my soul: Soul, you have many goods, stored up for many years. Relax, eat, drink, and be cheerful.’
Luke 12:20	But God said to him: ‘Foolish one, this very night they require your soul of you. To whom, then, will those things belong, which you have prepared?’
Luke 12:21	So it is with him who stores up for himself, and is not wealthy with God.”
Luke 12:22	And he said to his disciples: “And so I say to you: Do not choose to be anxious about your life, as to what you may eat, nor about your body, as to what you will wear.
Luke 12:23	Life is more than food, and the body is more than clothing.
Luke 12:24	Consider the ravens. For they neither sow nor reap; there is no storehouse or barn for them. And yet God pastures them. How much more are you, compared to them?
Luke 12:25	But which of you, by thinking, is able to add one cubit to his stature?
Luke 12:26	Therefore, if you are not capable, in what is so little, why be anxious about the rest?
Luke 12:27	Consider the lilies, how they grow. They neither work nor weave. But I say to you, not even Solomon, in all his glory, was clothed like one of these.
Luke 12:28	Therefore, if God so clothes the grass, which is in the field today and thrown into the furnace tomorrow, how much more you, O little in faith?
Luke 12:29	And so, do not choose to inquire as to what you will eat, or what you will drink. And do not choose to be lifted up on high.
Luke 12:30	For all these things are sought by the Gentiles of the world. And your Father knows that you have need of these things.
Luke 12:31	Yet truly, seek first the kingdom of God, and his justice, and all these things shall be added to you.
Luke 12:32	Do not be afraid, little flock; for it has pleased your Father to give you the kingdom.
Luke 12:33	Sell what you possess, and give alms. Make for yourselves purses that will not wear out, a treasure that will not fall short, in heaven, where no thief approaches, and no moth corrupts.
Luke 12:34	For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Luke 12:35	Let your waists be girded, and let lamps be burning in your hands.
Luke 12:36	And let you yourselves be like men awaiting their lord, when he will return from the wedding; so that, when he arrives and knocks, they may open to him promptly.
Luke 12:37	Blessed are those servants whom the Lord, when he returns, will find being vigilant. Amen I say to you, that he will gird himself and have them sit down to eat, while he, continuing on, will minister to them.
Luke 12:38	And if he will return in the second watch, or if in the third watch, and if he will find them to be so: then blessed are those servants.
Luke 12:39	But know this: that if the father of the family knew at what hour the thief would arrive, he would certainly stand watch, and he would not permit his house to be broken into.
Luke 12:40	You also must be prepared. For the Son of man will return at an hour that you will not realize.”
Luke 12:41	Then Peter said to him, “Lord, are you telling this parable to us, or also to everyone?”
Luke 12:42	So the Lord said: “Who do you think is the faithful and prudent steward, whom his Lord has appointed over his family, in order to give them their measure of wheat in due time?
Luke 12:43	Blessed is that servant if, when his Lord will return, he will find him acting in this manner.
Luke 12:44	Truly I say to you, that he will appoint him over all that he possesses.
Luke 12:45	But if that servant will have said in his heart, ‘My Lord has made a delay in his return,’ and if he has begun to strike the men and women servants, and to eat and drink, and to be inebriated,
Luke 12:46	then the Lord of that servant will return on a day which he hoped not, and at an hour which he knew not. And he will separate him, and he will place his portion with that of the unfaithful.
Luke 12:47	And that servant, who knew the will of his Lord, and who did not prepare and did not act according to his will, will be beaten many times over.
Luke 12:48	Yet he who did not know, and who acted in a way that deserves a beating, will be beaten fewer times. So then, of all to whom much has been given, much will be required. And of those to whom much has been entrusted, even more will be asked.
Luke 12:49	I have come to cast a fire upon the earth. And what should I desire, except that it may be kindled?
Luke 12:50	And I have a baptism, with which I am to be baptized. And how I am constrained, even until it may be accomplished!
Luke 12:51	Do you think that I have come to give peace to the earth? No, I tell you, but division.
Luke 12:52	For from this time on, there will be five in one house: divided as three against two, and as two against three.
Luke 12:53	A father will be divided against a son, and a son against his father; a mother against a daughter and a daughter against a mother; a mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.”
Luke 12:54	And he also said to the crowds: “When you see a cloud rising from the setting of the sun, immediately you say, ‘A rain cloud is coming.’ And so it does.
Luke 12:55	And when a south wind is blowing, you say, ‘It will be hot.’ And so it is.
Luke 12:56	You hypocrites! You discern the face of the heavens, and of the earth, yet how is it that you do not discern this time?
Luke 12:57	And why do you not, even among yourselves, judge what is just?
Luke 12:58	So, when you are going with your adversary to the ruler, while you are on the way, make an effort to be freed from him, lest perhaps he may lead you to the judge, and the judge may deliver you to the officer, and the officer may cast you into prison.
Luke 12:59	I tell you, you will not depart from there, until you have paid the very last coin.”
Luke 13:1	And there were present, at that very time, some who were reporting about the Galileans, whose blood Pilate mixed with their sacrifices.
Luke 13:2	And responding, he said to them: “Do you think that these Galileans must have sinned more than all other Galileans, because they suffered so much?
Luke 13:3	No, I tell you. But unless you repent, you will all perish similarly.
Luke 13:4	And those eighteen upon whom the tower of Siloam fell and killed them, do you think that they also were greater transgressors than all the men living in Jerusalem?
Luke 13:5	No, I tell you. But if you do not repent, you will all perish similarly.”
Luke 13:6	And he also told this parable: “A certain man had a fig tree, which was planted in his vineyard. And he came seeking fruit on it, but found none.
Luke 13:7	Then he said to the cultivator of the vineyard: ‘Behold, for these three years I came seeking fruit on this fig tree, and I have found none. Therefore, cut it down. For why should it even occupy the land?’
Luke 13:8	But in response, he said to him: ‘Lord, let it be for this year also, during which time I will dig around it and add fertilizer.
Luke 13:9	And, indeed, it should bear fruit. But if not, in the future, you shall cut it down.’ ”
Luke 13:10	Now he was teaching in their synagogue on the Sabbaths.
Luke 13:11	And behold, there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity for eighteen years. And she was bent over; and she was unable to look upwards at all.
Luke 13:12	And when Jesus saw her, he called her to himself, and he said to her, “Woman, you are released from your infirmity.”
Luke 13:13	And he laid his hands upon her, and immediately she was straightened, and she glorified God.
Luke 13:14	Then, as a result, the ruler of the synagogue became angry that Jesus had cured on the Sabbath, and he said to the crowd: “There are six days on which you ought to work. Therefore, come and be cured on those, and not on the day of the Sabbath.”
Luke 13:15	Then the Lord said to him in response: “You hypocrites! Does not each one of you, on the Sabbath, release his ox or donkey from the stall, and lead it to water?
Luke 13:16	So then, should not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound for lo these eighteen years, be released from this restraint on the day of the Sabbath?”
Luke 13:17	And as he was saying these things, all his adversaries were ashamed. And all the people rejoiced in everything that was being done gloriously by him.
Luke 13:18	And so he said: “To what is the kingdom of God similar, and to what figure shall I compare it?
Luke 13:19	It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and cast into his garden. And it grew, and it became a great tree, and the birds of the air rested in its branches.”
Luke 13:20	And again, he said: “To what figure shall I compare the kingdom of God?
Luke 13:21	It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of fine wheat flour, until it was entirely leavened.”
Luke 13:22	And he was traveling through the cities and towns, teaching and making his way to Jerusalem.
Luke 13:23	And someone said to him, “Lord, are they few who are saved?” But he said to them:
Luke 13:24	“Strive to enter through the narrow gate. For many, I tell you, will seek to enter and not be able.
Luke 13:25	Then, when the father of the family will have entered and shut the door, you will begin to stand outside and to knock at the door, saying, ‘Lord, open to us.’ And in response, he will say to you, ‘I do not know where you are from.’
Luke 13:26	Then you will begin to say, ‘We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets.’
Luke 13:27	And he will say to you: ‘I do not know where you are from. Depart from me, all you workers of iniquity!’
Luke 13:28	In that place, there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, yet you yourselves are expelled outside.
Luke 13:29	And they will arrive from the East, and the West, and the North, and the South; and they will recline at table in the kingdom of God.
Luke 13:30	And behold, those who are last will be first, and those who are first will be last.”
Luke 13:31	On the same day, some of the Pharisees approached, saying to him: “Depart, and go away from here. For Herod wishes to kill you.”
Luke 13:32	And he said to them: “Go and tell that fox: ‘Behold, I cast out demons and accomplish healings, today and tomorrow. And on the third day I reach the end.’
Luke 13:33	Yet truly, it is necessary for me to walk today and tomorrow and the following day. For it does not fall to a prophet to perish beyond Jerusalem.
Luke 13:34	Jerusalem, Jerusalem! You kill the prophets, and you stone those who are sent to you. Daily, I wanted to gather together your children, in the manner of a bird with her nest under her wings, but you were not willing!
Luke 13:35	Behold, your house will be left desolate for you. But I say to you, that you shall not see me, until it happens that you say: ‘Blessed is he who has arrived in the name of the Lord.’ ”
Luke 14:1	And it happened that, when Jesus entered the house of a certain leader of the Pharisees on the Sabbath to eat bread, they were observing him.
Luke 14:2	And behold, a certain man before him was afflicted with edema.
Luke 14:3	And responding, Jesus spoke to the experts in the law and to the Pharisees, saying, “Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbath?”
Luke 14:4	But they kept silent. Yet truly, taking hold of him, he healed him and sent him away.
Luke 14:5	And responding to them, he said, “Which of you will have a donkey or an ox fall into a pit, and will not promptly pull him out, on the day of the Sabbath?”
Luke 14:6	And they were unable to respond to him about these things.
Luke 14:7	Then he also told a parable, to those who were invited, noticing how they chose the first seats at the table, saying to them:
Luke 14:8	“When you are invited to a wedding, do not sit down in the first place, lest perhaps someone more honored than yourself may have been invited by him.
Luke 14:9	And then he who called both you and him, approaching, may say to you, ‘Give this place to him.’ And then you would begin, with shame, to take the last place.
Luke 14:10	But when you are invited, go, sit down in the lowest place, so that, when he who invited you arrives, he may say to you, ‘Friend, go up higher.’ Then you will have glory in the sight of those who sit at table together with you.
Luke 14:11	For everyone who exalts himself shall be humbled, and whoever humbles himself shall be exalted.”
Luke 14:12	Then he also said to the one who had invited him: “When you prepare a lunch or dinner, do not choose to call your friends, or your brothers, or your relatives, or your wealthy neighbors, lest perhaps they might then invite you in return and repayment would made to you.
Luke 14:13	But when you prepare a feast, call the poor, the disabled, the lame, and the blind.
Luke 14:14	And you will be blessed because they do not have a way to repay you. So then, your recompense will be in the resurrection of the just.”
Luke 14:15	When someone sitting at table with him had heard these things, he said to him, “Blessed is he who will eat bread in the kingdom of God.”
Luke 14:16	So he said to him: “A certain man prepared a great feast, and he invited many.
Luke 14:17	And he sent his servant, at the hour of the feast, to tell the invited to come; for now everything was ready.
Luke 14:18	And at once they all began to make excuses. The first said to him: ‘I bought a farm, and I need to go out and see it. I ask you to excuse me.’
Luke 14:19	And another said: ‘I bought five yoke of oxen, and I am going to examine them. I ask you to excuse me.’
Luke 14:20	And another said, ‘I have taken a wife, and therefore I am not able to go.’
Luke 14:21	And returning, the servant reported these things to his lord. Then the father of the family, becoming angry, said to his servant: ‘Go out quickly into the streets and neighborhoods of the city. And lead here the poor, and the disabled, and the blind, and the lame.’
Luke 14:22	And the servant said: ‘It has been done, just as you ordered, lord, and there is still room.’
Luke 14:23	And the lord said to the servant: ‘Go out to the highways and hedges, and compel them to enter, so that my house may be filled.
Luke 14:24	For I tell you, that none of those men who were invited will taste of my feast.’ ”
Luke 14:25	Now great crowds traveled with him. And turning around, he said to them:
Luke 14:26	“If anyone comes to me, and does not hate his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and sisters, and yes, even his own life, he is not able to be my disciple.
Luke 14:27	And whoever does not bear his cross and come after me, is not able to be my disciple.
Luke 14:28	For who among you, wanting to build a tower, would not first sit down and determine the costs that are required, to see if he has the means to complete it?
Luke 14:29	Otherwise, after he will have laid the foundation and not been able to finish it, everyone who sees it may begin to mock him,
Luke 14:30	saying: ‘This man began to build what he was not able to finish.’
Luke 14:31	Or, what king, advancing to engage in war against another king, would not first sit down and consider whether he may be able, with ten thousand, to meet one who comes against him with twenty thousand?
Luke 14:32	If not, then while the other is still far away, sending a delegation, he would ask him for terms of peace.
Luke 14:33	Therefore, everyone of you who does not renounce all that he possesses is not able to be my disciple.
Luke 14:34	Salt is good. But if the salt has lost its flavor, with what will it be seasoned?
Luke 14:35	It is useful neither in soil, nor in manure, so instead, it shall be thrown away. Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Luke 15:1	Now tax collectors and sinners were drawing near to him, so that they might listen to him.
Luke 15:2	And the Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying, “This one accepts sinners and eats with them.”
Luke 15:3	And he told this parable to them, saying:
Luke 15:4	“What man among you, who has one hundred sheep, and if he will have lost one of them, would not leave the ninety-nine in the desert and go after the one whom he had lost, until he finds it?
Luke 15:5	And when he has found it, he places it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
Luke 15:6	And returning home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, saying to them: ‘Congratulate me! For I have found my sheep, which had been lost.’
Luke 15:7	I say to you, that there will be so much more joy in heaven over one sinner repenting, than over the ninety-nine just, who do not need to repent.
Luke 15:8	Or what woman, having ten drachmas, if she will have lost one drachma, would not light a candle, and sweep the house, and diligently search until she finds it?
Luke 15:9	And when she has found it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying: ‘Rejoice with me! For I have found the drachma, which I had lost.’
Luke 15:10	So I say to you, there will be joy before the Angels of God over even one sinner who is repentant.”
Luke 15:11	And he said: “A certain man had two sons.
Luke 15:12	And the younger of them said to the father, ‘Father, give me the portion of your estate which would go to me.’ And he divided the estate between them.
Luke 15:13	And after not many days, the younger son, gathering it all together, set out on a long journey to a distant region. And there, he dissipated his substance, living in luxury.
Luke 15:14	And after he had consumed it all, a great famine occurred in that region, and he began to be in need.
Luke 15:15	And he went and attached himself to one of the citizens of that region. And he sent him to his farm, in order to feed the swine.
Luke 15:16	And he wanted to fill his belly with the scraps that the swine ate. But no one would give it to him.
Luke 15:17	And returning to his senses, he said: ‘How many hired hands in my father’s house have abundant bread, while I perish here in famine!
Luke 15:18	I shall rise up and go to my father, and I will say to him: Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you.
Luke 15:19	I am not worthy to be called your son. Make me one of your hired hands.’
Luke 15:20	And rising up, he went to his father. But while he was still at a distance, his father saw him, and he was moved with compassion, and running to him, he fell upon his neck and kissed him.
Luke 15:21	And the son said to him: ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you. Now I am not worthy to be called your son.’
Luke 15:22	But the father said to his servants: ‘Quickly! Bring out the best robe, and clothe him with it. And put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet.
Luke 15:23	And bring the fatted calf here, and kill it. And let us eat and hold a feast.
Luke 15:24	For this son of mine was dead, and has revived; he was lost, and is found.’ And they began to feast.
Luke 15:25	But his elder son was in the field. And when he returned and drew near to the house, he heard music and dancing.
Luke 15:26	And he called one of the servants, and he questioned him as to what these things meant.
Luke 15:27	And he said to him: ‘Your brother has returned, and your father has killed the fatted calf, because he has received him safely.’
Luke 15:28	Then he became indignant, and he was unwilling to enter. Therefore, his father, going out, began to plead with him.
Luke 15:29	And in response, he said to his father: ‘Behold, I have been serving you for so many years. And I have never transgressed your commandment. And yet, you have never given me even a young goat, so that I might feast with my friends.
Luke 15:30	Yet after this son of yours returned, who has devoured his substance with loose women, you have killed the fatted calf for him.’
Luke 15:31	But he said to him: ‘Son, you are with me always, and all that I have is yours.
Luke 15:32	But it was necessary to feast and to rejoice. For this brother of yours was dead, and has revived; he was lost, and is found.’ ”
Luke 16:1	And he also said to his disciples: “A certain man was wealthy, and he had a steward of his estate. And this man was accused to him of having dissipated his goods.
Luke 16:2	And he called him and said to him: ‘What is this that I hear about you? Give an account of your stewardship. For you can no longer be my steward.’
Luke 16:3	And the steward said within himself: ‘What shall I do? For my lord is taking the stewardship away from me. I am not strong enough to dig. I am too ashamed to beg.
Luke 16:4	I know what I will do so that, when I have been removed from the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.’
Luke 16:5	And so, calling together each one of his lord’s debtors, he said to the first, ‘How much do you owe my lord?’
Luke 16:6	So he said, ‘One hundred jars of oil.’ And he said to him, ‘Take your invoice, and quickly, sit down and write fifty.’
Luke 16:7	Next, he said to another, ‘In truth, how much do you owe?’ And he said, ‘One hundred measures of wheat.’ He said to him, ‘Take your record books, and write eighty.’
Luke 16:8	And the lord praised the iniquitous steward, in that he had acted prudently. For the sons of this age are more prudent with their generation than are the sons of light.
Luke 16:9	And so I say to you, make friends for yourself using iniquitous mammon, so that, when you will have passed away, they may receive you into the eternal tabernacles.
Luke 16:10	Whoever is faithful in what is least, is also faithful in what is greater. And whoever is unjust in what is small, is also unjust in what is greater.
Luke 16:11	So then, if you have not been faithful with iniquitous mammon, who will trust you with what is true?
Luke 16:12	And if you have not been faithful with what belongs to another, who will give you what is yours?
Luke 16:13	No servant is able to serve two lords. For either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will cling to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and mammon.”
Luke 16:14	But the Pharisees, who were greedy, were listening to all these things. And they ridiculed him.
Luke 16:15	And he said to them: “You are the ones who justify yourselves in the sight of men. But God knows your hearts. For what is lifted up by men is an abomination in the sight of God.
Luke 16:16	The law and the prophets were until John. Since then, the kingdom of God is being evangelized, and everyone acts with violence toward it.
Luke 16:17	But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away, than for one dot of the law to fall away.
Luke 16:18	Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery. And whoever marries her who has been divorced by her husband commits adultery.
Luke 16:19	A certain man was wealthy, and he was clothed in purple and in fine linen. And he feasted splendidly every day.
Luke 16:20	And there was a certain beggar, named Lazarus, who lay at his gate, covered with sores,
Luke 16:21	wanting to be filled with the crumbs which were falling from the wealthy man’s table. But no one gave it to him. And even the dogs came and licked his sores.
Luke 16:22	Then it happened that the beggar died, and he was carried by the Angels into the bosom of Abraham. Now the wealthy man also died, and he was entombed in Hell.
Luke 16:23	Then lifting up his eyes, while he was in torments, he saw Abraham far away, and Lazarus in his bosom.
Luke 16:24	And crying out, he said: ‘Father Abraham, take pity on me and send Lazarus, so that he may dip the tip of his finger in water to refresh my tongue. For I am tortured in this fire.’
Luke 16:25	And Abraham said to him: ‘Son, recall that you received good things in your life, and in comparison, Lazarus received bad things. But now he is consoled, and truly you are tormented.
Luke 16:26	And besides all this, between us and you a great chaos has been established, so that those who might want to cross from here to you are not able, nor can someone cross from there to here.’
Luke 16:27	And he said: ‘Then, father, I beg you to send him to my father’s house, for I have five brothers,
Luke 16:28	so that he may testify to them, lest they also come into this place of torments.’
Luke 16:29	And Abraham said to him: ‘They have Moses and the prophets. Let them listen to them.’
Luke 16:30	So he said: ‘No, father Abraham. But if someone were to go to them from the dead, they would repent.’
Luke 16:31	But he said to him: ‘If they will not listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they believe even if someone has resurrected from the dead.’ ”
Luke 17:1	And he said to his disciples: “It is impossible for scandals not to occur. But woe to him through whom they come!
Luke 17:2	It would be better for him if a millstone were placed around his neck and he were thrown into the sea, than to lead astray one of these little ones.
Luke 17:3	Be attentive to yourselves. If your brother has sinned against you, correct him. And if he has repented, forgive him.
Luke 17:4	And if he has sinned against you seven times a day, and seven times a day has turned back to you, saying, ‘I am sorry,’ then forgive him.”
Luke 17:5	And the Apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith.”
Luke 17:6	But the Lord said: “If you have faith like a grain of mustard seed, you may say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted, and be transplanted into the sea.’ And it would obey you.
Luke 17:7	But which of you, having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, would say to him, as he was returning from the field, ‘Come in immediately; sit down to eat,’
Luke 17:8	and would not say to him: ‘Prepare my dinner; gird yourself and minister to me, while I eat and drink; and after these things, you shall eat and drink?’
Luke 17:9	Would he be grateful to that servant, for doing what he commanded him to do?
Luke 17:10	I think not. So too, when you have done all these things that have been taught to you, you should say: ‘We are useless servants. We have done what we should have done.’ ”
Luke 17:11	And it happened that, while he was traveling to Jerusalem, he passed through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.
Luke 17:12	And as he was entering a certain town, ten leprous men met him, and they stood at a distance.
Luke 17:13	And they lifted up their voice, saying, “Jesus, Teacher, take pity on us.”
Luke 17:14	And when he saw them, he said, “Go, show yourselves to the priests.” And it happened that, as they were going, they were cleansed.
Luke 17:15	And one of them, when he saw that he was cleansed, returned, magnifying God with a loud voice.
Luke 17:16	And he fell face down before his feet, giving thanks. And this one was a Samaritan.
Luke 17:17	And in response, Jesus said: “Were not ten made clean? And so where are the nine?
Luke 17:18	Was no one found who would return and give glory to God, except this foreigner?”
Luke 17:19	And he said to him: “Rise up, go forth. For your faith has saved you.”
Luke 17:20	Then he was questioned by the Pharisees: “When does the kingdom of God arrive?” And in response, he said to them: “The kingdom of God arrives unobserved.
Luke 17:21	And so, they will not say, ‘Behold, it is here,’ or ‘Behold, it is there.’ For behold, the kingdom of God is within you.”
Luke 17:22	And he said to his disciples: “The time will come when you will desire to see one day of the Son of man, and you will not see it.
Luke 17:23	And they will say to you, ‘Behold, he is here,’ and ‘Behold, he is there.’ Do not choose to go out, and do not follow them.
Luke 17:24	For just as lightning flashes from under heaven and shines to whatever is under heaven, so also will the Son of man be in his day.
Luke 17:25	But first he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
Luke 17:26	And just as it happened in the days of Noah, so also will it be in the days of the Son of man.
Luke 17:27	They were eating and drinking; they were taking wives and being given in marriage, even until the day that Noah entered the ark. And the flood came and destroyed them all.
Luke 17:28	It shall be similar to what happened in the days of Lot. They were eating and drinking; they were buying and selling; they were planting and building.
Luke 17:29	Then, on the day that Lot departed from Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and it destroyed them all.
Luke 17:30	According to these things, so shall it be in the day when the Son of man will be revealed.
Luke 17:31	In that hour, whoever will be on the rooftop, with his goods in the house, let him not descend to take them. And whoever will be in the field, similarly, let him not turn back.
Luke 17:32	Remember Lot’s wife.
Luke 17:33	Whoever has sought to save his life, will lose it; and whoever has lost it, will bring it back to life.
Luke 17:34	I say to you, in that night, there will be two in one bed. One will be taken up, and the other will be left behind.
Luke 17:35	Two will be at the grindstone together. One will be taken up, and the other will be left behind. Two will be in the field. One will be taken up, and the other will be left behind.”
Luke 17:36	Responding, they said to him, “Where, Lord?”
Luke 17:37	And he said to them, “Wherever the body will be, in that place also, the eagles shall be gathered together.”
Luke 18:1	Now he also told them a parable, that we should continually pray and not cease,
Luke 18:2	saying: “There was a certain judge in a certain city, who did not fear God and did not respect man.
Luke 18:3	But there was a certain widow in that city, and she went to him, saying, ‘Vindicate me from my adversary.’
Luke 18:4	And he refused to do so for a long time. But afterwards, he said within himself: ‘Even though I do not fear God, nor respect man,
Luke 18:5	yet because this widow is pestering me, I will vindicate her, lest by returning, she may, in the end, wear me out.’ ”
Luke 18:6	Then the Lord said: “Listen to what the unjust judge said.
Luke 18:7	So then, will not God grant the vindication of his elect, who cry out to him day and night? Or will he continue to endure them?
Luke 18:8	I tell you that he will quickly bring vindication to them. Yet truly, when the Son of man returns, do you think that he will find faith on earth?”
Luke 18:9	Now about certain persons who consider themselves to be just, while disdaining others, he told also this parable:
Luke 18:10	“Two men ascended to the temple, in order to pray. One was a Pharisee, and the other was a tax collector.
Luke 18:11	Standing, the Pharisee prayed within himself in this way: ‘O God, I give thanks to you that I am not like the rest of men: robbers, unjust, adulterers, even as this tax collector chooses to be.
Luke 18:12	I fast twice between Sabbaths. I give tithes from all that I possess.’
Luke 18:13	And the tax collector, standing at a distance, was not willing to even lift up his eyes to heaven. But he struck his chest, saying: ‘O God, be merciful to me, a sinner.’
Luke 18:14	I say to you, this one descended to his house justified, but not the other. For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled; and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”
Luke 18:15	And they were bringing little children to him, so that he might touch them. And when the disciples saw this, they rebuked them.
Luke 18:16	But Jesus, calling them together, said: “Allow the children to come to me, and do not be an obstacle to them. For of such is the kingdom of God.
Luke 18:17	Amen, I say to you, whoever will not accept the kingdom of God like a child, will not enter into it.”
Luke 18:18	And a certain leader questioned him, saying: “Good teacher, what should I do to possess eternal life?”
Luke 18:19	Then Jesus said to him: “Why do you call me good? No one is good except God alone.
Luke 18:20	You know the commandments: You shall not kill. You shall not commit adultery. You shall not steal. You shall not give false testimony. Honor your father and mother.”
Luke 18:21	And he said, “I have kept all these things from my youth.”
Luke 18:22	And when Jesus heard this, he said to him: “One thing is still lacking for you. Sell all the things that you have, and give to the poor. And then you will have treasure in heaven. And come, follow me.”
Luke 18:23	When he heard this, he became very sorrowful. For he was very rich.
Luke 18:24	Then Jesus, seeing him brought to sorrow, said: “How difficult it is for those who have money to enter into the kingdom of God!
Luke 18:25	For it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than for a wealthy man to enter into the kingdom of God.”
Luke 18:26	And those who were listening to this said, “Then who is able to be saved?”
Luke 18:27	He said to them, “Things that are impossible with men are possible with God.”
Luke 18:28	And Peter said, “Behold, we have left everything, and we have followed you.”
Luke 18:29	And he said to them: “Amen, I say to you, there is no one who has left behind home, or parents, or brothers, or a wife, or children, for the sake of the kingdom of God,
Luke 18:30	who will not receive much more in this time, and in the age to come eternal life.”
Luke 18:31	Then Jesus took the twelve aside, and he said to them: “Behold, we are ascending to Jerusalem, and everything shall be completed which was written by the prophets about the Son of man.
Luke 18:32	For he will be handed over to the Gentiles, and he will be mocked and scourged and spit upon.
Luke 18:33	And after they have scourged him, they will kill him. And on the third day, he will rise again.”
Luke 18:34	But they understood none of these things. For this word was concealed from them, and they did not understand the things that were said.
Luke 18:35	Now it happened that, as he was approaching Jericho, a certain blind man was sitting beside the way, begging.
Luke 18:36	And when he heard the multitude passing by, he asked what this was.
Luke 18:37	And they told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by.
Luke 18:38	And he cried out, saying, “Jesus, Son of David, take pity on me!”
Luke 18:39	And those who were passing by rebuked him, so that he would be silent. Yet truly, he cried out all the more, “Son of David, take pity on me!”
Luke 18:40	Then Jesus, standing still, ordered him to be brought to him. And when he had drawn near, he questioned him,
Luke 18:41	saying, “What do you want, that I might do for you?” So he said, “Lord, that I may see.”
Luke 18:42	And Jesus said to him: “Look around. Your faith has saved you.”
Luke 18:43	And immediately he saw. And he followed him, magnifying God. And all the people, when they saw this, gave praise to God.
Luke 19:1	And having entered, he walked through Jericho.
Luke 19:2	And behold, there was a man named Zacchaeus. And he was the leader of the tax collectors, and he was wealthy.
Luke 19:3	And he sought to see Jesus, to see who he was. But he was unable to do so, because of the crowd, for he was small in stature.
Luke 19:4	And running ahead, he climbed up a sycamore tree, so that he might see him. For he was to pass near there.
Luke 19:5	And when he had arrived at the place, Jesus looked up and saw him, and he said to him: “Zacchaeus, hurry down. For today, I should lodge in your house.”
Luke 19:6	And hurrying, he came down, and he received him joyfully.
Luke 19:7	And when they all saw this, they murmured, saying that he had turned aside to a sinful man.
Luke 19:8	But Zacchaeus, standing still, said to the Lord: “Behold, Lord, one half of my goods I give to the poor. And if I have cheated anyone in any matter, I will repay him fourfold.”
Luke 19:9	Jesus said to him: “Today, salvation has come to this house; because of this, he too is a son of Abraham.
Luke 19:10	For the Son of man has come to seek and to save what had been lost.”
Luke 19:11	As they were listening to these things, continuing on, he spoke a parable, because he was nearing Jerusalem, and because they guessed that the kingdom of God might be manifested without delay.
Luke 19:12	Therefore, he said: “A certain man of nobility traveled to a far away region, to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return.
Luke 19:13	And calling his ten servants, he gave them ten pounds, and he said to them: ‘Do business until I return.’
Luke 19:14	But his citizens hated him. And so they sent a delegation after him, saying, ‘We do not want this one to reign over us.’
Luke 19:15	And it happened that he returned, having received the kingdom. And he ordered the servants, to whom he had given the money, to be called so that he would know how much each one had earned by doing business.
Luke 19:16	Now the first approached, saying: ‘Lord, your one pound has earned ten pounds.’
Luke 19:17	And he said to him: ‘Well done, good servant. Since you have been faithful in a small matter, you will hold authority over ten cities.’
Luke 19:18	And the second came, saying: ‘Lord, your one pound has earned five pounds.’
Luke 19:19	And he said to him, ‘And so, you shall be over five cities.’
Luke 19:20	And another approached, saying: ‘Lord, behold your one pound, which I kept stored in a cloth.
Luke 19:21	For I feared you, because you are an austere man. You take up what you did not lay down, and you reap what you did not sow.’
Luke 19:22	He said to him: ‘By your own mouth, do I judge you, O wicked servant. You knew that I am an austere man, taking up what I did not lay down, and reaping what I did not sow.
Luke 19:23	And so, why did you not give my money to the bank, so that, upon my return, I might have withdrawn it with interest?’
Luke 19:24	And he said to the bystanders, ‘Take the pound away from him, and give it to him who has ten pounds.’
Luke 19:25	And they said to him, ‘Lord, he has ten pounds.’
Luke 19:26	So then, I say to you, that to all who have, it shall be given, and he will have in abundance. And from him who does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.
Luke 19:27	‘Yet truly, as for those enemies of mine, who did not want me to reign over them, bring them here, and put them to death before me.’ ”
Luke 19:28	And having said these things, he went ahead, ascending to Jerusalem.
Luke 19:29	And it happened that, when he had drawn near to Bethphage and Bethania, to the mount which is called Olivet, he sent two of his disciples,
Luke 19:30	saying: “Go into the town which is opposite you. Upon entering it, you will find the colt of a donkey, tied, on which no man has ever sat. Untie it, and lead it here.
Luke 19:31	And if anyone will ask you, ‘Why are you untying it?’ you shall say this to him: ‘Because the Lord has requested its service.’ ”
Luke 19:32	And those who were sent went out, and they found the colt standing, just as he told them.
Luke 19:33	Then, as they were untying the colt, its owners said to them, “Why are you untying the colt?”
Luke 19:34	So they said, “Because the Lord has need of it.”
Luke 19:35	And they led it to Jesus. And casting their garments on the colt, they helped Jesus onto it.
Luke 19:36	Then, as he was traveling, they were laying down their garments along the way.
Luke 19:37	And when he was now drawing near to the descent of Mount Olivet, the entire crowd of his disciples began to praise God joyfully, with a loud voice, over all the powerful works which they had seen,
Luke 19:38	saying: “Blessed is the king who has arrived in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven and glory on high!”
Luke 19:39	And certain Pharisees within the crowd said to him, “Teacher, rebuke your disciples.”
Luke 19:40	And he said to them, “I tell you, that if these will keep silent, the stones themselves will cry out.”
Luke 19:41	And when he drew near, seeing the city, he wept over it, saying:
Luke 19:42	“If only you had known, indeed even in this your day, which things are for your peace. But now they are hidden from your eyes.
Luke 19:43	For the days will overtake you. And your enemies will encircle you with a valley. And they will surround you and hem you in on every side.
Luke 19:44	And they will knock you down to the ground, with your sons who are in you. And they will not leave stone upon stone within you, because you did not recognize the time of your visitation.”
Luke 19:45	And entering into the temple, he began to cast out those who sold in it, and those who bought,
Luke 19:46	saying to them: “It is written: ‘My house is a house of prayer.’ But you have made it into a den of robbers.”
Luke 19:47	And he was teaching in the temple daily. And the leaders of the priests, and the scribes, and the leaders of the people were seeking to destroy him.
Luke 19:48	But they could not find what to do to him. For all the people were listening to him attentively.
Luke 20:1	And it happened that, on one of the days when he was teaching the people in the temple and preaching the Gospel, the leaders of the priests, and the scribes, gathered together with the elders,
Luke 20:2	and they spoke to him, saying: “Tell us, by what authority do you do these things? Or, who is it that has given you this authority?”
Luke 20:3	And in response, Jesus said to them: “I will also question you about one word. Respond to me:
Luke 20:4	The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men?”
Luke 20:5	So they discussed it among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Then why did you not believe him?’
Luke 20:6	But if we say, ‘Of men,’ the whole people will stone us. For they are certain that John was a prophet.”
Luke 20:7	And so they responded that they did not know where it was from.
Luke 20:8	And Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.”
Luke 20:9	Then he began to tell the people this parable: “A man planted a vineyard, and he loaned it to settlers, and he was on a sojourn for a long time.
Luke 20:10	And in due time, he sent a servant to the farmers, so that they would give to him from the fruit of the vineyard. And they beat him and drove him away, empty-handed.
Luke 20:11	And he continued to send another servant. But beating him and treating him with contempt, they likewise sent him away, empty-handed.
Luke 20:12	And he continued to send a third. And wounding him also, they drove him away.
Luke 20:13	Then the lord of the vineyard said: ‘What shall I do? I will send my beloved son. Perhaps when they have seen him, they will respect him.’
Luke 20:14	And when the settlers had seen him, they discussed it among themselves, saying: ‘This one is the heir. Let us kill him, so that the inheritance will be ours.’
Luke 20:15	And forcing him outside of the vineyard, they killed him. What, then, will the lord of the vineyard do to them?”
Luke 20:16	“He will come and destroy those settlers, and he will give the vineyard to others.” And upon hearing this, they said to him, “Let it not be.”
Luke 20:17	Then, gazing at them, he said: “Then what does this mean, which is written: ‘The stone which the builders have rejected, the same has become the head of the corner?’
Luke 20:18	Everyone who falls on that stone will be shattered. And anyone upon whom it falls will be crushed.”
Luke 20:19	And the leaders of the priests, and the scribes, were seeking to lay hands on him in that same hour, but they feared the people. For they realized that he had spoken this parable about them.
Luke 20:20	And being attentive, they sent traitors, who would pretend that they were just, so that they might catch him in his words and then hand him over to the power and authority of the procurator.
Luke 20:21	And they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, we know that you speak and teach correctly, and that you do not consider anyone’s status, but you teach the way of God in truth.
Luke 20:22	Is it lawful for us to pay the tribute to Caesar, or not?”
Luke 20:23	But realizing their deceitfulness, he said to them: “Why do you test me?
Luke 20:24	Show me a denarius. Whose image and inscription does it have?” In response, they said to him, “Caesar’s.”
Luke 20:25	And so, he said to them: “Then repay the things that are Caesar’s, to Caesar, and the things that are God’s, to God.”
Luke 20:26	And they were not able to contradict his word before the people. And being amazed at his answer, they were silent.
Luke 20:27	Now some of the Sadducees, who deny that there is a resurrection, approached him. And they questioned him,
Luke 20:28	saying: “Teacher, Moses wrote for us: If any man’s brother will have died, having a wife, and if he does not have any children, then his brother should take her as his wife, and he should raise up offspring for his brother.
Luke 20:29	And so there were seven brothers. And the first took a wife, and he died without sons.
Luke 20:30	And the next one married her, and he also died without a son.
Luke 20:31	And the third married her, and similarly all seven, and none of them left behind any offspring, and they each died.
Luke 20:32	Last of all, the woman also died.
Luke 20:33	In the resurrection, then, whose wife will she be? For certainly all seven had her as a wife.”
Luke 20:34	And so, Jesus said to them: “The children of this age marry and are given in marriage.
Luke 20:35	Yet truly, those who shall be held worthy of that age, and of the resurrection from the dead, will neither be married, nor take wives.
Luke 20:36	For they can no longer die. For they are equal to the Angels, and they are children of God, since they are children of the resurrection.
Luke 20:37	For in truth, the dead do rise again, as Moses also showed beside the bush, when he called the Lord: ‘The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.’
Luke 20:38	And so he is not the God of the dead, but of the living. For all are alive to him.”
Luke 20:39	Then some of the scribes, in response, said to him, “Teacher, you have spoken well.”
Luke 20:40	And they no longer dared to question him about anything.
Luke 20:41	But he said to them: “How can they say that the Christ is the son of David?
Luke 20:42	Even David himself says, in the book of Psalms: ‘The Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand,
Luke 20:43	until I set your enemies as your footstool.’
Luke 20:44	Therefore, David calls him Lord. So how can he be his son?”
Luke 20:45	Now in the hearing of all the people, he said to his disciples:
Luke 20:46	“Be cautious of the scribes, who choose to walk in long robes, and who love greetings in the marketplace, and the first chairs in the synagogues, and the first places at table during feasts,
Luke 20:47	who devour the houses of widows, feigning long prayers. These will receive the greater damnation.”
Luke 21:1	And looking around, he saw the wealthy putting their donations into the offertory.
Luke 21:2	Then he also saw a certain widow, a pauper, putting in two small brass coins.
Luke 21:3	And he said: “Truly, I say to you, that this poor widow has put in more than all the others.
Luke 21:4	For all these, out of their abundance, have added to the gifts for God. But she, out of what she needed, has put in all that she had to live on.”
Luke 21:5	And when some of them were saying, about the temple, that it was adorned with excellent stones and gifts, he said,
Luke 21:6	“These things that you see, the days will arrive when there will not be left behind stone upon stone, which is not thrown down.”
Luke 21:7	Then they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, when will these things be? And what will be the sign when these things will happen?”
Luke 21:8	And he said: “Be cautious, lest you be seduced. For many will come in my name, saying: ‘For I am he,’ and, ‘The time has drawn near.’ And so, do not choose to go after them.
Luke 21:9	And when you will have heard of battles and seditions, do not be terrified. These things must happen first. But the end is not so soon.”
Luke 21:10	Then he said to them: “People will rise up against people, and kingdom against kingdom.
Luke 21:11	And there will be great earthquakes in various places, and pestilences, and famines, and terrors from heaven; and there will be great signs.
Luke 21:12	But before all these things, they will lay their hands on you and persecute you, handing you over to synagogues and into custody, dragging you before kings and governors, because of my name.
Luke 21:13	And this will be an opportunity for you to give testimony.
Luke 21:14	Therefore, set this in your hearts: that you should not consider in advance how you might respond.
Luke 21:15	For I will give to you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries will not be able to resist or contradict.
Luke 21:16	And you will be handed over by your parents, and brothers, and relatives, and friends. And they will bring about the death of some of you.
Luke 21:17	And you will be hated by all because of my name.
Luke 21:18	And yet, not a hair of your head will perish.
Luke 21:19	By your patience, you shall possess your souls.
Luke 21:20	Then, when you will have seen Jerusalem encircled by an army, know then that its desolation has drawn near.
Luke 21:21	Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, and those who are in its midst withdraw, and those who are in the countryside not enter into it.
Luke 21:22	For these are the days of retribution, so that all things may be fulfilled, which have been written.
Luke 21:23	Then woe to those who are pregnant or nursing in those days. For there will be great distress upon the land and great wrath upon this people.
Luke 21:24	And they will fall by the edge of the sword. And they will be led away as captives into all nations. And Jerusalem will be trampled by the Gentiles, until the times of the nations are fulfilled.
Luke 21:25	And there will be signs in the sun and the moon and the stars. And there will be, on earth, distress among the Gentiles, out of confusion at the roaring of the sea and of the waves:
Luke 21:26	men withering away out of fear and out of apprehension over the things that will overwhelm the whole world. For the powers of the heavens will be moved.
Luke 21:27	And then they will see the Son of man coming on a cloud, with great power and majesty.
Luke 21:28	But when these things begin to happen, lift up your heads and look around you, because your redemption draws near.”
Luke 21:29	And he told them a comparison: “Take notice of the fig tree and of all the trees.
Luke 21:30	When presently they produce fruit from themselves, you know that summer is near.
Luke 21:31	So you also, when you will have seen these things happen, know that the kingdom of God is near.
Luke 21:32	Amen I say to you, this lineage shall not pass away, until all these things happen.
Luke 21:33	Heaven and earth shall pass away. But my words shall not pass away.
Luke 21:34	But be attentive to yourselves, lest perhaps your hearts may be weighed down by self-indulgence and inebriation and the cares of this life. And then that day may overwhelm you suddenly.
Luke 21:35	For like a snare it will overwhelm all those who sit upon the face of the entire earth.
Luke 21:36	And so, be vigilant, praying at all times, so that you may be held worthy to escape from all these things, which are in the future, and to stand before the Son of man.”
Luke 21:37	Now in the daytime, he was teaching in the temple. But truly, departing in the evening, he lodged on the mount that is called Olivet.
Luke 21:38	And all the people arrived in the morning to listen to him in the temple.
Luke 22:1	Now the days of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, which is called Passover, were approaching.
Luke 22:2	And the leaders of the priests, and the scribes, were seeking a way to execute Jesus. Yet truly, they were afraid of the people.
Luke 22:3	Then Satan entered into Judas, who was surnamed Iscariot, one of the twelve.
Luke 22:4	And he went out and was speaking with the leaders of the priests, and the magistrates, as to how he might hand him over to them.
Luke 22:5	And they were glad, and so they made an agreement to give him money.
Luke 22:6	And he made a promise. And he was seeking an opportunity to hand him over, apart from the crowds.
Luke 22:7	Then the day of Unleavened Bread arrived, on which it was necessary to kill the Pascal lamb.
Luke 22:8	And he sent Peter and John, saying, “Go out, and prepare the Passover for us, so that we may eat.”
Luke 22:9	But they said, “Where do you want us to prepare it?”
Luke 22:10	And he said to them: “Behold, as you are entering into the city, a certain man will meet you, carrying a pitcher of water. Follow him to the house into which he enters.
Luke 22:11	And you shall say to the father of the household: ‘The Teacher says to you: Where is the guestroom, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?’
Luke 22:12	And he will show you a large cenacle, fully furnished. And so, prepare it there.”
Luke 22:13	And going out, they found it to be just as he had told them. And they prepared the Passover.
Luke 22:14	And when the hour had arrived, he sat down at table, and the twelve Apostles with him.
Luke 22:15	And he said to them: “With longing have I desired to eat this Passover with you, before I suffer.
Luke 22:16	For I say to you, that from this time, I will not eat it, until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.”
Luke 22:17	And having taken the chalice, he gave thanks, and he said: “Take this and share it among yourselves.
Luke 22:18	For I say to you, that I will not drink from the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God arrives.”
Luke 22:19	And taking bread, he gave thanks and broke it and gave it to them, saying: “This is my body, which is given for you. Do this as a commemoration of me.”
Luke 22:20	Similarly also, he took the chalice, after he had eaten the meal, saying: “This chalice is the new covenant in my blood, which will be shed for you.
Luke 22:21	But in truth, behold, the hand of my betrayer is with me at table.
Luke 22:22	And indeed, the Son of man goes according to what has been determined. And yet, woe to that man by whom he will be betrayed.”
Luke 22:23	And they began to inquire among themselves, as to which of them might do this.
Luke 22:24	Now there was also a contention among them, as to which of them seemed to be the greater.
Luke 22:25	And he said to them: “The kings of the Gentiles dominate them; and those who hold authority over them are called beneficent.
Luke 22:26	But it must not be so with you. Instead, whoever is greater among you, let him become the lesser. And whoever is the leader, let him become the server.
Luke 22:27	For who is greater: he who sits at table, or he who serves? Is not he who sits at table? Yet I am in your midst as one who serves.
Luke 22:28	But you are those who have remained with me during my trials.
Luke 22:29	And I dispose to you, just as my Father has disposed to me, a kingdom,
Luke 22:30	so that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and so that you may sit upon thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.”
Luke 22:31	And the Lord said: “Simon, Simon! Behold, Satan has asked for you, so that he may sift you like wheat.
Luke 22:32	But I have prayed for you, so that your faith may not fail, and so that you, once converted, may confirm your brothers.”
Luke 22:33	And he said to him, “Lord, I am prepared to go with you, even to prison and to death.”
Luke 22:34	And he said, “I say to you, Peter, the rooster will not crow this day, until you have three times denied that you know me.” And he said to them,
Luke 22:35	“When I sent you without money or provisions or shoes, did you lack anything?”
Luke 22:36	And they said, “Nothing.” Then he said to them: “But now, let whoever has money take it, and likewise with provisions. And whoever does not have these, let him sell his coat and buy a sword.
Luke 22:37	For I say to you, that what has been written must still be fulfilled in me: ‘And he was esteemed with the wicked.’ Yet even these things about me have an end.”
Luke 22:38	So they said, “Lord, behold, there are two swords here.” But he said to them, “It is sufficient.”
Luke 22:39	And departing, he went out, according to his custom, to the Mount of Olives. And his disciples also followed him.
Luke 22:40	And when he had arrived at the place, he said to them: “Pray, lest you enter into temptation.”
Luke 22:41	And he was separated from them by about a stone’s throw. And kneeling down, he prayed,
Luke 22:42	saying: “Father, if you are willing, take this chalice away from me. Yet truly, let not my will, but yours, be done.”
Luke 22:43	Then an Angel appeared to him from heaven, strengthening him. And being in agony, he prayed more intensely;
Luke 22:44	and so his sweat became like drops of blood, running down to the ground.
Luke 22:45	And when he had risen up from prayer and had gone to his disciples, he found them sleeping out of sorrow.
Luke 22:46	And he said to them: “Why are you sleeping? Rise up, pray, lest you enter into temptation.”
Luke 22:47	While he was still speaking, behold, a crowd arrived. And he who is called Judas, one of the twelve, went ahead of them and approached Jesus, in order to kiss him.
Luke 22:48	And Jesus said to him, “Judas, do you betray the Son of man with a kiss?”
Luke 22:49	Then those who were around him, realizing what was about to happen, said to him: “Lord, shall we strike with the sword?”
Luke 22:50	And one of them struck the servant of the high priest and cut off his right ear.
Luke 22:51	But in response, Jesus said, “Permit even this.” And when he had touched his ear, he healed him.
Luke 22:52	Then Jesus said to the leaders of the priests, and the magistrates of the temple, and the elders, who had come to him: “Have you gone out, as if against a thief, with swords and clubs?
Luke 22:53	When I was with you each day in the temple, you did not extend your hands against me. But this is your hour and that of the power of darkness.”
Luke 22:54	And apprehending him, they led him to the house of the high priest. Yet truly, Peter followed at a distance.
Luke 22:55	Now as they were sitting around a fire, which had been kindled in the middle of the atrium, Peter was in their midst.
Luke 22:56	And when a certain woman servant had seen him sitting in its light, and had looked at him intently, she said, “This one was also with him.”
Luke 22:57	But he denied him by saying, “Woman, I do not know him.”
Luke 22:58	And after a little while, another one, seeing him, said, “You also are one of them.” Yet Peter said, “O man, I am not.”
Luke 22:59	And after the interval of about one hour had passed, someone else affirmed it, saying: “Truly, this one also was with him. For he is also a Galilean.”
Luke 22:60	And Peter said: “Man, I do not know what you are saying.” And at once, while he was still speaking, the rooster crowed.
Luke 22:61	And the Lord turned around and looked at Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord that he had said: “For before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.”
Luke 22:62	And going out, Peter wept bitterly.
Luke 22:63	And the men who were holding him ridiculed him and beat him.
Luke 22:64	And they blindfolded him and repeatedly struck his face. And they questioned him, saying: “Prophesy! Who is it that struck you?”
Luke 22:65	And blaspheming in many other ways, they spoke against him.
Luke 22:66	And when it was daytime, the elders of the people, and the leaders of the priests, and the scribes convened. And they led him into their council, saying, “If you are the Christ, tell us.”
Luke 22:67	And he said to them: “If I tell you, you will not believe me.
Luke 22:68	And if I also question you, you will not answer me. Neither will you release me.
Luke 22:69	But from this time, the Son of man will be sitting at the right hand of the power of God.”
Luke 22:70	Then they all said, “So you are the Son of God?” And he said. “You are saying that I am.”
Luke 22:71	And they said: “Why do we still require testimony? For we have heard it ourselves, from his own mouth.”
Luke 23:1	And the entire multitude of them, rising up, led him to Pilate.
Luke 23:2	Then they began to accuse him, saying, “We found this one subverting our nation, and prohibiting giving tribute to Caesar, and saying that he is Christ the king.”
Luke 23:3	And Pilate questioned him, saying: “You are the king of the Jews?” But in response, he said: “You are saying it.”
Luke 23:4	Then Pilate said to the leaders of the priests and to the crowds, “I find no case against this man.”
Luke 23:5	But they continued more intensely, saying: “He has stirred up the people, teaching throughout all of Judea, beginning from Galilee, even to this place.”
Luke 23:6	But Pilate, upon hearing Galilee, asked if the man were of Galilee.
Luke 23:7	And when he realized that he was under Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him away to Herod, who was himself also at Jerusalem in those days.
Luke 23:8	Then Herod, upon seeing Jesus, was very glad. For he had been wanting to see him for a long time, because he had heard so many things about him, and he was hoping to see some kind of sign wrought by him.
Luke 23:9	Then he questioned him with many words. But he gave him no response at all.
Luke 23:10	And the leaders of the priests, and the scribes, stood firm in persistently accusing him.
Luke 23:11	Then Herod, with his soldiers, scorned him. And he ridiculed him, clothing him in a white garment. And he sent him back to Pilate.
Luke 23:12	And Herod and Pilate became friends on that day. For previously they were enemies to one another.
Luke 23:13	And Pilate, calling together the leaders of the priests, and the magistrates, and the people,
Luke 23:14	said to them: “You have brought before me this man, as one who disturbs the people. And behold, having questioned him before you, I find no case against this man, in those things about which you accuse him.
Luke 23:15	And neither did Herod. For I sent you all to him, and behold, nothing deserving of death was recorded about him.
Luke 23:16	Therefore, I will chastise him and release him.”
Luke 23:17	Now he was required to release one person for them on the feast day.
Luke 23:18	But the entire crowd exclaimed together, saying: “Take this one, and release to us Barabbas!”
Luke 23:19	Now he had been cast into prison because of a certain sedition that occurred in the city and for murder.
Luke 23:20	Then Pilate spoke to them again, wanting to release Jesus.
Luke 23:21	But they shouted in response, saying: “Crucify him! Crucify him!”
Luke 23:22	Then he said to them a third time: “Why? What evil has he done? I find no case against him for death. Therefore, I will chastise him and release him.”
Luke 23:23	But they persisted, with loud voices, in demanding that he be crucified. And their voices increased in intensity.
Luke 23:24	And so Pilate issued a judgment granting their petition.
Luke 23:25	Then he released for them the one who had been cast into prison for murder and sedition, whom they were requesting. Yet truly, Jesus he handed over to their will.
Luke 23:26	And as they were leading him away, they apprehended a certain one, Simon of Cyrene, as he was returning from the countryside. And they imposed the cross on him to carry after Jesus.
Luke 23:27	Then a great crowd of people followed him, with women who were mourning and lamenting him.
Luke 23:28	But Jesus, turning to them, said: “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep over me. Instead, weep over yourselves and over your children.
Luke 23:29	For behold, the days will arrive in which they will say, ‘Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that have not borne, and the breasts that have not nursed.’
Luke 23:30	Then they will begin to say to the mountains, ‘Fall over us,’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us.’
Luke 23:31	For if they do these things with green wood, what will be done with the dry?”
Luke 23:32	Now they also led out two other criminals with him, in order to execute them.
Luke 23:33	And when they arrived at the place that is called Calvary, they crucified him there, with the robbers, one to the right and the other to the left.
Luke 23:34	Then Jesus said, “Father, forgive them. For they know not what they do.” And truly, dividing his garments, they cast lots.
Luke 23:35	And people were standing near, watching. And the leaders among them derided him, saying: “He saved others. Let him save himself, if this one is the Christ, the elect of God.”
Luke 23:36	And the soldiers also ridiculed him, approaching him and offering him vinegar,
Luke 23:37	and saying, “If you are the king of the Jews, save yourself.”
Luke 23:38	Now there was also an inscription written over him in letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew: THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Luke 23:39	And one of those robbers who were hanging blasphemed him, saying, “If you are the Christ, save yourself and us.”
Luke 23:40	But the other responded by rebuking him, saying: “Do you have no fear of God, since you are under the same condemnation?
Luke 23:41	And indeed, it is just for us. For we are receiving what our deeds deserve. But truly, this one has done nothing wrong.”
Luke 23:42	And he said to Jesus, “Lord, remember me when you come into your kingdom.”
Luke 23:43	And Jesus said to him, “Amen I say to you, this day you shall be with me in Paradise.”
Luke 23:44	Now it was nearly the sixth hour, and a darkness occurred over the entire earth, until the ninth hour.
Luke 23:45	And the sun was obscured. And the veil of the temple was torn down the middle.
Luke 23:46	And Jesus, crying out with a loud voice, said: “Father, into your hands I commend my spirit.” And upon saying this, he expired.
Luke 23:47	Now, the centurion, seeing what had happened, glorified God, saying, “Truly, this man was the Just One.”
Luke 23:48	And the entire crowd of those who came together to see this spectacle also saw what had happened, and they returned, striking their breasts.
Luke 23:49	Now all those who knew him, and the women who had followed him from Galilee, were standing at a distance, watching these things.
Luke 23:50	And behold, there was a man named Joseph, who was a councilman, a good and just man,
Luke 23:51	(for he had not consented to their decision or their actions). He was from Arimathea, a city of Judea. And he was himself also anticipating the kingdom of God.
Luke 23:52	This man approached Pilate and petitioned for the body of Jesus.
Luke 23:53	And taking him down, he wrapped him in a fine linen cloth, and he placed him in a tomb hewn from rock, in which no one had ever been placed.
Luke 23:54	And it was the day of Preparation, and the Sabbath was drawing near.
Luke 23:55	Now the women who had come with him from Galilee, by following, saw the tomb and the manner in which his body was placed.
Luke 23:56	And upon returning, they prepared aromatic spices and ointments. But on the Sabbath, indeed, they rested, according to the commandment.
Luke 24:1	Then, on the first Sabbath, at very first light, they went to the tomb, carrying the aromatic spices that they had prepared.
Luke 24:2	And they found the stone rolled back from the tomb.
Luke 24:3	And upon entering, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
Luke 24:4	And it happened that, while their minds were still confused about this, behold, two men stood beside them, in shining apparel.
Luke 24:5	Then, since they were afraid and were turning their faces toward the ground, these two said to them: “Why do you seek the living with the dead?
Luke 24:6	He is not here, for he has risen. Recall how he spoke to you, when he was still in Galilee,
Luke 24:7	saying: ‘For the Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and on the third day rise again.’ ”
Luke 24:8	And they called to mind his words.
Luke 24:9	And returning from the tomb, they reported all these things to the eleven, and to all the others.
Luke 24:10	Now it was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary of James, and the other women who were with them, who told these things to the Apostles.
Luke 24:11	But these words seemed to them a delusion. And so they did not believe them.
Luke 24:12	But Peter, rising up, ran to the tomb. And stooping down, he saw the linen cloths positioned alone, and he went away wondering to himself about what had happened.
Luke 24:13	And behold, two of them went out, on the same day, to a town named Emmaus, which was the distance of sixty stadia from Jerusalem.
Luke 24:14	And they spoke to one another about all of these things that had occurred.
Luke 24:15	And it happened that, while they were speculating and questioning within themselves, Jesus himself, drawing near, traveled with them.
Luke 24:16	But their eyes were restrained, so that they would not recognize him.
Luke 24:17	And he said to them, “What are these words, which you are discussing with one another, as you walk and are sad?”
Luke 24:18	And one of them, whose name was Cleopas, responded by saying to him, “Are you the only one visiting Jerusalem who does not know the things that have happened there in these days?”
Luke 24:19	And he said to them, “What things?” And they said, “About Jesus of Nazareth, who was a noble prophet, powerful in works and in words, before God and all the people.
Luke 24:20	And how our high priests and leaders handed him over to be condemned to death. And they crucified him.
Luke 24:21	But we were hoping that he would be the Redeemer of Israel. And now, on top of all this, today is the third day since these things have happened.
Luke 24:22	Then, too, certain women from among us terrified us. For before daytime, they were at the tomb,
Luke 24:23	and, having not found his body, they returned, saying that they had even seen a vision of Angels, who said that he is alive.
Luke 24:24	And some of us went out to the tomb. And they found it just as the women had said. But truly, they did not find him.”
Luke 24:25	And he said to them: “How foolish and reluctant in heart you are, to believe everything that has been spoken by the Prophets!
Luke 24:26	Was not the Christ required to suffer these things, and so enter into his glory?”
Luke 24:27	And beginning from Moses and all the Prophets, he interpreted for them, in all the Scriptures, the things that were about him.
Luke 24:28	And they drew near to the town where they were going. And he conducted himself so as to go on further.
Luke 24:29	But they were insistent with him, saying, “Remain with us, because it is toward evening and now daylight is declining.” And so he entered with them.
Luke 24:30	And it happened that, while he was at table with them, he took bread, and he blessed and broke it, and he extended it to them.
Luke 24:31	And their eyes were opened, and they recognized him. And he vanished from their eyes.
Luke 24:32	And they said to one another, “Was not our heart burning within us, while he was speaking on the way, and when he opened the Scriptures to us?”
Luke 24:33	And rising up at that same hour, they returned to Jerusalem. And they found the eleven gathered together, and those who were with them,
Luke 24:34	saying: “In truth, the Lord has risen, and he has appeared to Simon.”
Luke 24:35	And they explained the things that were done on the way, and how they had recognized him at the breaking of the bread.
Luke 24:36	Then, while they were talking about these things, Jesus stood in their midst, And he said to them: “Peace be with you. It is I. Do not be afraid.”
Luke 24:37	Yet truly, they were very disturbed and terrified, supposing that they saw a spirit.
Luke 24:38	And he said to them: “Why are you disturbed, and why do these thoughts rise up in your hearts?
Luke 24:39	See my hands and feet, that it is I myself. Look and touch. For a spirit does not have flesh and bones, as you see that I have.”
Luke 24:40	And when he had said this, he showed them his hands and feet.
Luke 24:41	Then, while they were still in disbelief and in wonder out of joy, he said, “Do you have anything here to eat?”
Luke 24:42	And they offered him a piece of roasted fish and a honeycomb.
Luke 24:43	And when he had eaten these in their sight, taking up what was left, he gave it to them.
Luke 24:44	And he said to them: “These are the words that I spoke to you when I was still with you, because all things must be fulfilled which are written in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms about me.”
Luke 24:45	Then he opened their mind, so that they might understand the Scriptures.
Luke 24:46	And he said to them: “For so it is written, and so it was necessary, for the Christ to suffer and to rise up from the dead on the third day,
Luke 24:47	and, in his name, for repentance and the remission of sins to be preached, among all the nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
Luke 24:48	And you are witnesses of these things.
Luke 24:49	And I am sending the Promise of my Father upon you. But you must stay in the city, until such time as you are clothed with power from on high.”
Luke 24:50	Then he led them out as far as Bethania. And lifting up his hands, he blessed them.
Luke 24:51	And it happened that, while he was blessing them, he withdrew from them, and he was carried up into heaven.
Luke 24:52	And worshiping, they returned to Jerusalem with great joy.
Luke 24:53	And they were always in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.
John 1:1	In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the Word.
John 1:2	He was with God in the beginning.
John 1:3	All things were made through Him, and nothing that was made was made without Him.
John 1:4	Life was in Him, and Life was the light of men.
John 1:5	And the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it.
John 1:6	There was a man sent by God, whose name was John.
John 1:7	He arrived as a witness to offer testimony about the Light, so that all would believe through him.
John 1:8	He was not the Light, but he was to offer testimony about the Light.
John 1:9	The true Light, which illuminates every man, was coming into this world.
John 1:10	He was in the world, and the world was made through him, and the world did not recognize him.
John 1:11	He went to his own, and his own did not accept him.
John 1:12	Yet whoever did accept him, those who believed in his name, he gave them the power to become the sons of God.
John 1:13	These are born, not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
John 1:14	And the Word became flesh, and he lived among us, and we saw his glory, glory like that of an only-begotten son from the Father, full of grace and truth.
John 1:15	John offers testimony about him, and he cries out, saying: “This is the one about whom I said: ‘He who is to come after me, has been placed ahead of me, because he existed before me.’ ”
John 1:16	And from his fullness, we all have received, even grace for grace.
John 1:17	For the law was given though Moses, but grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
John 1:18	No one ever saw God; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he himself has described him.
John 1:19	And this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to him, so that they might ask him, “Who are you?”
John 1:20	And he confessed it and did not deny it; and what he confessed was: “I am not the Christ.”
John 1:21	And they questioned him: “Then what are you? Are you Elijah?” And he said, “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” And he answered, “No.”
John 1:22	Therefore, they said to him: “Who are you, so that we may give an answer to those who sent us? What do you say about yourself?”
John 1:23	He said, “I am a voice crying out in the desert, ‘Make straight the way of the Lord,’ just as the prophet Isaiah said.”
John 1:24	And some of those who had been sent were from among the Pharisees.
John 1:25	And they questioned him and said to him, “Then why do you baptize, if you are not the Christ, and not Elijah, and not the Prophet?”
John 1:26	John answered them by saying: “I baptize with water. But in your midst stands one, whom you do not know.
John 1:27	The same is he who is to come after me, who has been placed ahead of me, the laces of whose shoes I am not worthy to loosen.”
John 1:28	These things happened in Bethania, across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
John 1:29	On the next day, John saw Jesus coming toward him, and so he said: “Behold, the Lamb of God. Behold, he who takes away the sin of the world.
John 1:30	This is the one about whom I said, ‘After me arrives a man, who has been placed ahead of me, because he existed before me.’
John 1:31	And I did not know him. Yet it is for this reason that I come baptizing with water: so that he may be made manifest in Israel.”
John 1:32	And John offered testimony, saying: “For I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove; and he remained upon him.
John 1:33	And I did not know him. But he who sent me to baptize with water said to me: ‘He over whom you will see the Spirit descending and remaining upon him, this is the one who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.’
John 1:34	And I saw, and I gave testimony: that this one is the Son of God.”
John 1:35	The next day again, John was standing with two of his disciples.
John 1:36	And catching sight of Jesus walking, he said, “Behold, the Lamb of God.”
John 1:37	And two disciples were listening to him speaking. And they followed Jesus.
John 1:38	Then Jesus, turning around and seeing them following him, said to them, “What are you seeking?” And they said to him, “Rabbi (which means in translation, Teacher), where do you live?”
John 1:39	He said to them, “Come and see.” They went and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day. Now it was about the tenth hour.
John 1:40	And Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who had heard about him from John and had followed him.
John 1:41	First, he found his brother Simon, and he said to him, “We have found the Messiah,” (which is translated as the Christ).
John 1:42	And he led him to Jesus. And Jesus, gazing at him, said: “You are Simon, son of Jonah. You shall be called Cephas,” (which is translated as Peter).
John 1:43	On the next day, he wanted to go into Galilee, and he found Philip. And Jesus said to him, “Follow me.”
John 1:44	Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.
John 1:45	Philip found Nathanael, and he said to him, “We have found the one about whom Moses wrote in the Law and the Prophets: Jesus, the son of Joseph, from Nazareth.”
John 1:46	And Nathanael said to him, “Can anything good be from Nazareth?” Philip said to him, “Come and see.”
John 1:47	Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him, and he said about him, “Behold, an Israelite in whom truly there is no deceit.”
John 1:48	Nathanael said to him, “From where do you know me?” Jesus responded and said to him, “Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.”
John 1:49	Nathanael answered him and said: “Rabbi, you are the Son of God. You are the King of Israel.”
John 1:50	Jesus responded and said to him: “Because I told you that I saw you under the fig tree, you believe. Greater things than these, you will see.”
John 1:51	And he said to him, “Amen, amen, I say to you, you will see heaven opened, and the Angels of God ascending and descending over the Son of man.”
John 2:1	And on the third day, a wedding was held in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there.
John 2:2	Now Jesus was also invited to the wedding, with his disciples.
John 2:3	And when the wine was failing, the mother of Jesus said to him, “They have no wine.”
John 2:4	And Jesus said to her: “What is that to me and to you, woman? My hour has not yet arrived.”
John 2:5	His mother said to the servants, “Do whatever he tells you.”
John 2:6	Now in that place, there were six stone water jars, for the purification ritual of the Jews, containing two or three measures each.
John 2:7	Jesus said to them, “Fill the water jars with water.” And they filled them to the very top.
John 2:8	And Jesus said to them, “Now draw from it, and carry it to the chief steward of the feast.” And they took it to him.
John 2:9	Then, when the chief steward had tasted the water made into wine, since he did not know where it was from, for only the servants who had drawn the water knew, the chief steward called the groom,
John 2:10	and he said to him: “Every man offers the good wine first, and then, when they have become inebriated, he offers what is worse. But you have kept the good wine until now.”
John 2:11	This was the beginning of the signs that Jesus accomplished in Cana of Galilee, and it manifested his glory, and his disciples believed in him.
John 2:12	After this, he descended to Capernaum, with his mother and his brothers and his disciples, but they did not remain there for many days.
John 2:13	And the Passover of the Jews was near, and so Jesus ascended to Jerusalem.
John 2:14	And he found, sitting in the temple, sellers of oxen and sheep and doves, and the moneychangers.
John 2:15	And when he had made something like a whip out of little cords, he drove them all out of the temple, including the sheep and the oxen. And he poured out the brass coins of the moneychangers, and he overturned their tables.
John 2:16	And to those who were selling doves, he said: “Take these things out of here, and do not make my Father’s house into a house of commerce.”
John 2:17	And truly, his disciples were reminded that it is written: “Zeal for your house consumes me.”
John 2:18	Then the Jews responded and said to him, “What sign can you show to us, that you may do these things?”
John 2:19	Jesus responded and said to them, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”
John 2:20	Then the Jews said, “This temple has been built up over forty-six years, and you will raise it up in three days?”
John 2:21	Yet he was speaking about the Temple of his body.
John 2:22	Therefore, when he had resurrected from the dead, his disciples were reminded that he had said this, and they believed in the Scriptures and in the word that Jesus had spoken.
John 2:23	Now while he was at Jerusalem during the Passover, on the day of the feast, many trusted in his name, seeing his signs that he was accomplishing.
John 2:24	But Jesus did not trust himself to them, because he himself had knowledge of all persons,
John 2:25	and because he had no need of anyone to offer testimony about a man. For he knew what was within a man.
John 3:1	Now there was a man among the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a leader of the Jews.
John 3:2	He went to Jesus at night, and he said to him: “Rabbi, we know that you have arrived as a teacher from God. For no one would be able to accomplish these signs, which you accomplish, unless God were with him.”
John 3:3	Jesus responded and said to him, “Amen, amen, I say to you, unless one has been reborn anew, he is not able to see the kingdom of God.”
John 3:4	Nicodemus said to him: “How could a man be born when he is old? Surely, he cannot enter a second time into his mother’s womb to be reborn?”
John 3:5	Jesus responded: “Amen, amen, I say to you, unless one has been reborn by water and the Holy Spirit, he is not able to enter into the kingdom of God.
John 3:6	What is born of the flesh is flesh, and what is born of the Spirit is spirit.
John 3:7	You should not be amazed that I said to you: You must be born anew.
John 3:8	The Spirit inspires where he wills. And you hear his voice, but you do not know where he comes from, or where he is going. So it is with all who are born of the Spirit.”
John 3:9	Nicodemus responded and said to him, “How are these things able to be accomplished?”
John 3:10	Jesus responded and said to him: “You are a teacher in Israel, and you are ignorant of these things?
John 3:11	Amen, amen, I say to you, that we speak about what we know, and we testify about what we have seen. But you do not accept our testimony.
John 3:12	If I have spoken to you about earthly things, and you have not believed, then how will you believe, if I will speak to you about heavenly things?
John 3:13	And no one has ascended to heaven, except the one who descended from heaven: the Son of man who is in heaven.
John 3:14	And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the desert, so also must the Son of man be lifted up,
John 3:15	so that whoever believes in him may not perish, but may have eternal life.
John 3:16	For God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten Son, so that all who believe in him may not perish, but may have eternal life.
John 3:17	For God did not send his Son into the world, in order to judge the world, but in order that the world may be saved through him.
John 3:18	Whoever believes in him is not judged. But whoever does not believe is already judged, because he does not believe in the name of the only-begotten Son of God.
John 3:19	And this is the judgment: that the Light has come into the world, and men loved darkness more than light. For their works were evil.
John 3:20	For everyone who does evil hates the Light and does not go toward the Light, so that his works may not be corrected.
John 3:21	But whoever acts in truth goes toward the Light, so that his works may be manifested, because they have been accomplished in God.”
John 3:22	After these things, Jesus and his disciples went into the land of Judea. And he was living there with them and baptizing.
John 3:23	Now John was also baptizing, at Aenon near Salim, because there was much water in that place. And they were arriving and being baptized.
John 3:24	For John had not yet been cast into prison.
John 3:25	Then a dispute occurred between the disciples of John and the Jews, about purification.
John 3:26	And they went to John and said to him: “Rabbi, the one who was with you across the Jordan, about whom you offered testimony: behold, he is baptizing and everyone is going to him.”
John 3:27	John responded and said: “A man is not able to receive anything, unless it has been given to him from heaven.
John 3:28	You yourselves offer testimony for me that I said, ‘I am not the Christ,’ but that I have been sent before him.
John 3:29	He who holds the bride is the groom. But the friend of the groom, who stands and listens to Him, rejoices joyfully at the voice of the groom. And so, this, my joy, has been fulfilled.
John 3:30	He must increase, while I must decrease.
John 3:31	He who comes from above, is above everything. He who is from below, is of the earth, and he speaks about the earth. He who comes from heaven is above everything.
John 3:32	And what he has seen and heard, about this he testifies. And no one accepts his testimony.
John 3:33	Whoever has accepted his testimony has certified that God is truthful.
John 3:34	For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God. For God does not give the Spirit by measure.
John 3:35	The Father loves the Son, and he has given everything into his hand.
John 3:36	Whoever believes in the Son has eternal life. But whoever is unbelieving toward the Son shall not see life; instead the wrath of God remains upon him.”
John 4:1	And so, when Jesus realized that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made more disciples and baptized more than John,
John 4:2	(though Jesus himself was not baptizing, but only his disciples)
John 4:3	he left behind Judea, and he traveled again to Galilee.
John 4:4	Now he needed to cross through Samaria.
John 4:5	Therefore, he went into a city of Samaria which is called Sychar, near the estate which Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
John 4:6	And Jacob’s well was there. And so Jesus, being tired from the journey, was sitting in a certain way on the well. It was about the sixth hour.
John 4:7	A woman of Samaria arrived to draw water. Jesus said to her, “Give me to drink.”
John 4:8	For his disciples had gone into the city in order to buy food.
John 4:9	And so, that Samaritan woman said to him, “How is it that you, being a Jew, are requesting a drink from me, though I am a Samaritan woman?” For the Jews do not associate with the Samaritans.
John 4:10	Jesus responded and said to her: “If you knew the gift of God, and who it is who is saying to you, ‘Give me to drink,’ perhaps you would have made a request of him, and he would have given you living water.”
John 4:11	The woman said to him: “Lord, you do not have anything with which to draw water, and the well is deep. From where, then, do you have living water?
John 4:12	Surely, you are not greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well and who drank from it, with his sons and his cattle?”
John 4:13	Jesus responded and said to her: “All who drink from this water will thirst again. But whoever shall drink from the water that I will give to him will not thirst for eternity.
John 4:14	Instead, the water that I will give to him will become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life.”
John 4:15	The woman said to him, “Lord, give me this water, so that I may not thirst and may not come here to draw water.”
John 4:16	Jesus said to her, “Go, call your husband, and return here.”
John 4:17	The woman responded and said, “I have no husband.” Jesus said to her: “You have spoken well, in saying, ‘I have no husband.’
John 4:18	For you have had five husbands, but he whom you have now is not your husband. You have spoken this in truth.”
John 4:19	The woman said to him: “Lord, I see that you are a Prophet.
John 4:20	Our fathers worshipped on this mountain, but you say that Jerusalem is the place where one ought to worship.”
John 4:21	Jesus said to her: “Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when you shall worship the Father, neither on this mountain, nor in Jerusalem.
John 4:22	You worship what you do not know; we worship what we do know. For salvation is from the Jews.
John 4:23	But the hour is coming, and it is now, when true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth. For the Father also seeks such persons who may worship him.
John 4:24	God is Spirit. And so, those who worship him must worship in spirit and in truth.”
John 4:25	The woman said to him: “I know that the Messiah is coming (who is called the Christ). And then, when he will have arrived, he will announce everything to us.”
John 4:26	Jesus said to her: “I am he, the one who is speaking with you.”
John 4:27	And then his disciples arrived. And they wondered that he was speaking with the woman. Yet no one said: “What are you seeking?” or, “Why are you talking with her?”
John 4:28	And so the woman left behind her water jar and went into the city. And she said to the men there:
John 4:29	“Come and see a man who has told me all the things that I have done. Is he not the Christ?”
John 4:30	Therefore, they went out of the city and came to him.
John 4:31	Meanwhile, the disciples petitioned him, saying, “Rabbi, eat.”
John 4:32	But he said to them, “I have food to eat which you do not know.”
John 4:33	Therefore, the disciples said to one another, “Could someone have brought him something to eat?”
John 4:34	Jesus said to them: “My food is to do the will of the One who sent me, so that I may perfect his work.
John 4:35	Do you not say, ‘There are still four months, and then the harvest arrives?’ Behold, I say to you: Lift up your eyes and look at the countryside; for it is already ripe for the harvest.
John 4:36	For he who reaps, receives wages and gathers fruit unto eternal life, so that both he who sows and he who reaps may rejoice together.
John 4:37	For in this the word is true: that it is one who sows, and it is another who reaps.
John 4:38	I have sent you to reap that for which you did not labor. Others have labored, and you have entered into their labors.”
John 4:39	Now many of the Samaritans from that city believed in him, because of the word of the woman who was offering testimony: “For he told me all the things that I have done.”
John 4:40	Therefore, when the Samaritans had come to him, they petitioned him to lodge there. And he lodged there for two days.
John 4:41	And many more believed in him, because of his own word.
John 4:42	And they said to the woman: “Now we believe, not because of your speech, but because we ourselves have heard him, and so we know that he is truly the Savior of the world.”
John 4:43	Then, after two days, he departed from there, and he traveled into Galilee.
John 4:44	For Jesus himself offered testimony that a Prophet has no honor in his own country.
John 4:45	And so, when he had arrived in Galilee, the Galileans received him, because they had seen all that he had done at Jerusalem, in the day of the feast. For they also went to the feast day.
John 4:46	Then he went again into Cana of Galilee, where he made water into wine. And there was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at Capernaum.
John 4:47	Since he had heard that Jesus came to Galilee from Judea, he sent to him and begged him to come down and heal his son. For he was beginning to die.
John 4:48	Therefore, Jesus said to him, “Unless you have seen signs and wonders, you do not believe.”
John 4:49	The ruler said to him, “Lord, come down before my son dies.”
John 4:50	Jesus said to him, “Go, your son lives.” The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and so he went away.
John 4:51	Then, as he was going down, his servants met him. And they reported to him, saying that his son was alive.
John 4:52	Therefore, he asked them at which hour he had become better. And they said to him, “Yesterday, at the seventh hour, the fever left him.”
John 4:53	Then the father realized that it was at the same hour that Jesus said to him, “Your son lives.” And both he and his entire household believed.
John 4:54	This next sign was the second that Jesus accomplished, after he had arrived in Galilee from Judea.
John 5:1	After these things, there was a feast day of the Jews, and so Jesus ascended to Jerusalem.
John 5:2	Now at Jerusalem is the Pool of Evidence, which in Hebrew is known as the Place of Mercy; it has five porticos.
John 5:3	Along these lay a great multitude of the sick, the blind, the lame, and the withered, waiting for the movement of the water.
John 5:4	Now at times an Angel of the Lord would descend into the pool, and so the water was moved. And whoever descended first into the pool, after the motion of the water, he was healed of whatever infirmity held him.
John 5:5	And there was a certain man in that place, having been in his infirmity for thirty-eight years.
John 5:6	Then, when Jesus had seen him reclining, and when he realized that he had been afflicted for a long time, he said to him, “Do you want to be healed?”
John 5:7	The invalid answered him: “Lord, I do not have any man to put me in the pool, when the water has been stirred. For as I am going, another descends ahead of me.”
John 5:8	Jesus said to him, “Rise, take up your stretcher, and walk.”
John 5:9	And immediately the man was healed. And he took up his stretcher and walked. Now this day was the Sabbath.
John 5:10	Therefore, the Jews said to the one who had been healed: “It is the Sabbath. It is not lawful for you to take up your stretcher.”
John 5:11	He answered them, “The one who healed me, he said to me, ‘Take up your stretcher and walk.’ ”
John 5:12	Therefore, they questioned him, “Who is that man, who said to you, ‘Take up your bed and walk?’ ”
John 5:13	But the one who had been given health did not know who it was. For Jesus had turned aside from the crowd gathered in that place.
John 5:14	Afterwards, Jesus found him in the temple, and he said to him: “Behold, you have been healed. Do not choose to sin further, otherwise something worse may happen to you.”
John 5:15	This man went away, and he reported to the Jews that it was Jesus who had given him health.
John 5:16	Because of this, the Jews were persecuting Jesus, for he was doing these things on the Sabbath.
John 5:17	But Jesus answered them, “Even now, my Father is working, and I am working.”
John 5:18	And so, because of this, the Jews were seeking to kill him even more so. For not only did he break the Sabbath, but he even said that God was his Father, making himself equal to God.
John 5:19	Then Jesus responded and said to them: “Amen, amen, I say to you, the Son is not able to do anything of himself, but only what he has seen the Father doing. For whatever he does, even this does the Son do, similarly.
John 5:20	For the Father loves the Son, and he shows him all that he himself does. And greater works than these will he show him, so much so that you shall wonder.
John 5:21	For just as the Father raises the dead and gives life, so also does the Son give life to whomever he wills.
John 5:22	For the Father does not judge anyone. But he has given all judgment to the Son,
John 5:23	so that all may honor the Son, just as they honor the Father. Whoever does not honor the Son, does not honor the Father who sent him.
John 5:24	Amen, amen, I say to you, that whoever hears my word, and believes in him who sent me, has eternal life, and he does not go into judgment, but instead he crosses from death into life.
John 5:25	Amen, amen, I say to you, that the hour is coming, and it is now, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and those who hear it shall live.
John 5:26	For just as the Father has life in himself, so also has he granted to the Son to have life in himself.
John 5:27	And he has given him the authority to accomplish judgment. For he is the Son of man.
John 5:28	Do not be amazed at this. For the hour is coming in which all who are in the grave shall hear the voice of the Son of God.
John 5:29	And those who have done good shall go forth to the resurrection of life. Yet truly, those who have done evil shall go to the resurrection of judgment.
John 5:30	I am not able to do anything of myself. As I hear, so do I judge. And my judgment is just. For I do not seek my own will, but the will of him who sent me.
John 5:31	If I offer testimony about myself, my testimony is not true.
John 5:32	There is another who offers testimony about me, and I know that the testimony which he offers about me is true.
John 5:33	You sent to John, and he offered testimony to the truth.
John 5:34	But I do not accept testimony from man. Instead, I say these things, so that you may be saved.
John 5:35	He was a burning and shining light. So you were willing, at the time, to exult in his light.
John 5:36	But I hold a greater testimony than that of John. For the works which the Father has given to me, so that I may complete them, these works themselves that I do, offer testimony about me: that the Father has sent me.
John 5:37	And the Father who has sent me has himself offered testimony about me. And you have never heard his voice, nor have you beheld his appearance.
John 5:38	And you do not have his word abiding in you. For the one whom he sent, the same you would not believe.
John 5:39	Study the Scriptures. For you think that in them you have eternal life. And yet they also offer testimony about me.
John 5:40	And you are not willing to come to me, so that you may have life.
John 5:41	I do not accept glory from men.
John 5:42	But I know you, that you do not have the love of God within you.
John 5:43	I have come in the name of my Father, and you do not accept me. If another will arrive in his own name, him you will accept.
John 5:44	How are you able to believe, you who accept glory from one another and yet do not seek the glory that is from God alone?
John 5:45	Do not consider that I might accuse you with the Father. There is one who accuses you, Moses, in whom you hope.
John 5:46	For if you were believing in Moses, perhaps you would believe in me also. For he wrote about me.
John 5:47	But if you do not believe by his writings, how will you believe by my words?”
John 6:1	After these things, Jesus traveled across the sea of Galilee, which is the Sea of Tiberias.
John 6:2	And a great multitude was following him, for they saw the signs that he was accomplishing toward those who were infirm.
John 6:3	Therefore, Jesus went onto a mountain, and he sat down there with his disciples.
John 6:4	Now the Passover, the feast day of the Jews, was near.
John 6:5	And so, when Jesus had lifted up his eyes and had seen that a very great multitude came to him, he said to Philip, “From where should we buy bread, so that these may eat?”
John 6:6	But he said this to test him. For he himself knew what he would do.
John 6:7	Philip answered him, “Two hundred denarii of bread would not be sufficient for each of them to receive even a little.”
John 6:8	One of his disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, said to him:
John 6:9	“There is a certain boy here, who has five barley loaves and two fish. But what are these among so many?”
John 6:10	Then Jesus said, “Have the men sit down to eat.” Now, there was much grass in that place. And so the men, in number about five thousand, sat down to eat.
John 6:11	Therefore, Jesus took the bread, and when he had given thanks, he distributed it to those who were sitting down to eat; similarly also, from the fish, as much as they wanted.
John 6:12	Then, when they were filled, he said to his disciples, “Gather the fragments that are left over, lest they be lost.”
John 6:13	And so they gathered, and they filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which were left over from those who had eaten.
John 6:14	Therefore, those men, when they had seen that Jesus had accomplished a sign, they said, “Truly, this one is the Prophet who is to come into the world.”
John 6:15	And so, when he realized that they were going to come and take him away and make him king, Jesus fled back to the mountain, by himself alone.
John 6:16	Then, when evening arrived, his disciples descended to the sea.
John 6:17	And when they had climbed into a boat, they went across the sea to Capernaum. And darkness had now arrived, and Jesus had not returned to them.
John 6:18	Then the sea was stirred up by a great wind that was blowing.
John 6:19	And so, when they had rowed about twenty-five or thirty stadia, they saw Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing near to the boat, and they were afraid.
John 6:20	But he said to them: “It is I. Do not be afraid.”
John 6:21	Therefore, they were willing to receive him into the boat. But immediately the boat was at the land to which they were going.
John 6:22	On the next day, the crowd which was standing across the sea saw that there were no other small boats in that place, except one, and that Jesus had not entered into the boat with his disciples, but that his disciples had departed alone.
John 6:23	Yet truly, other boats came over from Tiberias, next to the place where they had eaten the bread after the Lord gave thanks.
John 6:24	Therefore, when the crowd had seen that Jesus was not there, nor his disciples, they climbed into the small boats, and they went to Capernaum, seeking Jesus.
John 6:25	And when they had found him across the sea, they said to him, “Rabbi, when did you come here?”
John 6:26	Jesus answered them and said: “Amen, amen, I say to you, you seek me, not because you have seen signs, but because you have eaten from the bread and were satisfied.
John 6:27	Do not work for food that perishes, but for that which endures to eternal life, which the Son of man will give to you. For God the Father has sealed him.”
John 6:28	Therefore, they said to him, “What should we do, so that we may labor in the works of God?”
John 6:29	Jesus responded and said to them, “This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he sent.”
John 6:30	And so they said to him: “Then what sign will you do, so that we may see it and believe in you? What will you work?
John 6:31	Our fathers ate manna in the desert, just as it has been written, ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’ ”
John 6:32	Therefore, Jesus said to them: “Amen, amen, I say to you, Moses did not give you bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven.
John 6:33	For the bread of God is he who descends from heaven and gives life to the world.”
John 6:34	And so they said to him, “Lord, give us this bread always.”
John 6:35	Then Jesus said to them: “I am the bread of life. Whoever comes to me shall not hunger, and whoever believes in me shall never thirst.
John 6:36	But I say to you, that even though you have seen me, you do not believe.
John 6:37	All that the Father gives to me shall come to me. And whoever comes to me, I will not cast out.
John 6:38	For I descended from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me.
John 6:39	Yet this is the will of the Father who sent me: that I should lose nothing out of all that he has given to me, but that I should raise them up on the last day.
John 6:40	So then, this is the will of my Father who sent me: that everyone who sees the Son and believes in him may have eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.”
John 6:41	Therefore, the Jews murmured about him, because he had said: “I am the living bread, who descended from heaven.”
John 6:42	And they said: “Is this not Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? Then how can he say: ‘For I descended from heaven?’ ”
John 6:43	And so Jesus responded and said to them: “Do not choose to murmur among yourselves.
John 6:44	No one is able to come to me, unless the Father, who has sent me, has drawn him. And I will raise him up on the last day.
John 6:45	It has been written in the Prophets: ‘And they shall all be taught by God.’ Everyone who has listened and learned from the Father comes to me.
John 6:46	Not that anyone has seen the Father, except he who is from God; this one has seen the Father.
John 6:47	Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever believes in me has eternal life.
John 6:48	I am the bread of life.
John 6:49	Your fathers ate manna in the desert, and they died.
John 6:50	This is the bread which descends from heaven, so that if anyone will eat from it, he may not die.
John 6:51	I am the living bread, who descended from heaven. If anyone eats from this bread, he shall live in eternity. And the bread that I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world.”
John 6:52	Therefore, the Jews debated among themselves, saying, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?”
John 6:53	And so, Jesus said to them: “Amen, amen, I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, you will not have life in you.
John 6:54	Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.
John 6:55	For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink.
John 6:56	Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me, and I in him.
John 6:57	Just as the living Father has sent me and I live because of the Father, so also whoever eats me, the same shall live because of me.
John 6:58	This is the bread that descends from heaven. It is not like the manna that your fathers ate, for they died. Whoever eats this bread shall live forever.”
John 6:59	He said these things when he was teaching in the synagogue at Capernaum.
John 6:60	Therefore, many of his disciples, upon hearing this, said: “This saying is difficult,” and, “Who is able to listen to it?”
John 6:61	But Jesus, knowing within himself that his disciples were murmuring about this, said to them: “Does this offend you?
John 6:62	Then what if you were to see the Son of man ascending to where he was before?
John 6:63	It is the Spirit who gives life. The flesh does not offer anything of benefit. The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life.
John 6:64	But there are some among you who do not believe.” For Jesus knew from the beginning who were unbelieving and which one would betray him.
John 6:65	And so he said, “For this reason, I said to you that no one is able to come to me, unless it has been given to him by my Father.”
John 6:66	After this, many of his disciples went back, and they no longer walked with him.
John 6:67	Therefore, Jesus said to the twelve, “Do you also want to go away?”
John 6:68	Then Simon Peter answered him: “Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words of eternal life.
John 6:69	And we have believed, and we recognize that you are the Christ, the Son of God.”
John 6:70	Jesus answered them: “Have I not chosen you twelve? And yet one among you is a devil.”
John 6:71	Now he was speaking about Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon. For this one, even though he was one of the twelve, was about to betray him.
John 7:1	Then, after these things, Jesus was walking in Galilee. For he was not willing to walk in Judea, because the Jews were seeking to kill him.
John 7:2	Now the feast day of the Jews, the Feast of Tabernacles, was near.
John 7:3	And his brothers said to him: “Move away from here and go into Judea, so that your disciples there may also see your works that you do.
John 7:4	Of course, no one does anything in secret, but he himself seeks to be in the public view. Since you do these things, manifest yourself to the world.”
John 7:5	For neither did his brothers believe in him.
John 7:6	Therefore, Jesus said to them: “My time has not yet come; but your time is always at hand.
John 7:7	The world cannot hate you. But it hates me, because I offer testimony about it, that its works are evil.
John 7:8	You may go up to this feast day. But I am not going up to this feast day, because my time has not yet been fulfilled.”
John 7:9	When he had said these things, he himself remained in Galilee.
John 7:10	But after his brothers went up, then he also went up to the feast day, not openly, but as if in secret.
John 7:11	Therefore, the Jews were seeking him on the feast day, and they were saying, “Where is he?”
John 7:12	And there was much murmuring in the crowd concerning him. For certain ones were saying, “He is good.” But others were saying, “No, for he seduces the crowds.”
John 7:13	Yet no one was speaking openly about him, out of fear of the Jews.
John 7:14	Then, about the middle of the feast, Jesus ascended into the temple, and he was teaching.
John 7:15	And the Jews wondered, saying: “How does this one know letters, though he has not been taught?”
John 7:16	Jesus responded to them and said: “My doctrine is not of me, but of him who sent me.
John 7:17	If anyone has chosen to do his will, then he will realize, about the doctrine, whether it is from God, or whether I am speaking from myself.
John 7:18	Whoever speaks from himself seeks his own glory. But whoever seeks the glory of him who sent him, this one is true, and injustice is not in him.
John 7:19	Did not Moses give you the law? And yet not one among you keeps the law!
John 7:20	Why are you seeking to kill me?” The crowd responded and said: “You must have a demon. Who is seeking to kill you?”
John 7:21	Jesus responded and said to them: “One work have I done, and you all wonder.
John 7:22	For Moses gave you circumcision, (not that it is of Moses, but of the fathers) and on the Sabbath you circumcise a man.
John 7:23	If a man can receive circumcision on the Sabbath, so that the law of Moses may not be broken, why are you indignant toward me, because I have made a man whole on the Sabbath?
John 7:24	Do not judge according to appearances, but instead judge a just judgment.”
John 7:25	Therefore, some of those from Jerusalem said: “Is he not the one whom they are seeking to kill?
John 7:26	And behold, he is speaking openly, and they say nothing to him. Could the leaders have decided that it is true this one is the Christ?
John 7:27	But we know him and where he is from. And when the Christ has arrived, no one will know where he is from.”
John 7:28	Therefore, Jesus cried out in the temple, teaching and saying: “You know me, and you also know where I am from. And I have not arrived of myself, but he who sent me is true, and him you do not know.
John 7:29	I know him. For I am from him, and he has sent me.”
John 7:30	Therefore, they were seeking to apprehend him, and yet no one laid hands on him, because his hour had not yet come.
John 7:31	But many among the crowd believed in him, and they were saying, “When the Christ arrives, will he perform more signs than this man does?”
John 7:32	The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about him. And the leaders and the Pharisees sent attendants to apprehend him.
John 7:33	Therefore, Jesus said to them: “For a brief time, I am still with you, and then I am going to him who sent me.
John 7:34	You shall seek me, and you will not find me. And where I am, you are not able to go.”
John 7:35	And so the Jews said among themselves: “Where is this place to which he will go, such that we will not find him? Will he go to those dispersed among the Gentiles and teach the Gentiles?
John 7:36	What is this word that he spoke, ‘You will seek me and you will not find me; and where I am, you are not able to go?’ ”
John 7:37	Then, on the last great day of the feast, Jesus was standing and crying out, saying: “If anyone thirsts, let him come to me and drink:
John 7:38	whoever believes in me, just as Scripture says, ‘From his chest shall flow rivers of living water.’ ”
John 7:39	Now he said this about the Spirit, which those who believe in him would soon be receiving. For the Spirit had not yet been given, because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
John 7:40	Therefore, some from that crowd, when they had heard these words of his, were saying, “This one truly is the Prophet.”
John 7:41	Others were saying, “He is the Christ.” Yet certain ones were saying: “Does the Christ come from Galilee?
John 7:42	Does Scripture not say that the Christ comes from the offspring of David and from Bethlehem, the town where David was?”
John 7:43	And so there arose a dissension among the multitude because of him.
John 7:44	Now certain ones among them wanted to apprehended him, but no one laid hands upon him.
John 7:45	Therefore, the attendants went to the high priests and the Pharisees. And they said to them, “Why have you not brought him?”
John 7:46	The attendants responded, “Never has a man spoken like this man.”
John 7:47	And so the Pharisees answered them: “Have you also been seduced?
John 7:48	Have any of the leaders believed in him, or any of the Pharisees?
John 7:49	But this crowd, which does not know the law, they are accursed.”
John 7:50	Nicodemus, the one who came to him by night and who was one of them, said to them,
John 7:51	“Does our law judge a man, unless it has first heard him and has known what he has done?”
John 7:52	They responded and said to him: “Are you also a Galilean? Study the Scriptures, and see that a prophet does not arise from Galilee.”
John 7:53	And each one returned to his own house.
John 8:1	But Jesus continued on to the Mount of Olives.
John 8:2	And early in the morning, he went again to the temple; and all the people came to him. And sitting down, he taught them.
John 8:3	Now the scribes and Pharisees brought forward a woman caught in adultery, and they stood her in front of them.
John 8:4	And they said to him: “Teacher, this woman was just now caught in adultery.
John 8:5	And in the law, Moses commanded us to stone such a one. Therefore, what do you say?”
John 8:6	But they were saying this to test him, so that they might be able to accuse him. Then Jesus bent down and wrote with his finger on the earth.
John 8:7	And then, when they persevered in questioning him, he stood upright and said to them, “Let whoever is without sin among you be the first to cast a stone at her.”
John 8:8	And bending down again, he wrote on the earth.
John 8:9	But upon hearing this, they went away, one by one, beginning with the eldest. And Jesus alone remained, with the woman standing in front of him.
John 8:10	Then Jesus, raising himself up, said to her: “Woman, where are those who accused you? Has no one condemned you?”
John 8:11	And she said, “No one, Lord.” Then Jesus said: “Neither will I condemn you. Go, and now do not choose to sin anymore.”
John 8:12	Then Jesus spoke to them again, saying: “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me does not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.”
John 8:13	And so the Pharisees said to him, “You offer testimony about yourself; your testimony is not true.”
John 8:14	Jesus responded and said to them: “Even though I offer testimony about myself, my testimony is true, for I know where I came from and where I am going.
John 8:15	You judge according to the flesh. I do not judge anyone.
John 8:16	And when I do judge, my judgment is true. For I am not alone, but it is I and he who sent me: the Father.
John 8:17	And it is written in your law that the testimony of two men is true.
John 8:18	I am one who offers testimony about myself, and the Father who sent me offers testimony about me.”
John 8:19	Therefore, they said to him, “Where is your Father?” Jesus answered: “You know neither me, nor my Father. If you did know me, perhaps you would know my Father also.”
John 8:20	Jesus spoke these words at the treasury, while teaching in the temple. And no one apprehended him, because his hour had not yet come.
John 8:21	Therefore, Jesus again spoke to them: “I am going, and you shall seek me. And you will die in your sin. Where I am going, you are not able to go.”
John 8:22	And so the Jews said, “Is he going to kill himself, for he said: ‘Where I am going, you are not able to go?’ ”
John 8:23	And he said to them: “You are from below. I am from above. You are of this world. I am not of this world.
John 8:24	Therefore, I said to you, that you will die in your sins. For if you will not believe that I am, you will die in your sin.”
John 8:25	And so they said to him, “Who are you?” Jesus said to them: “The Beginning, who is also speaking to you.
John 8:26	I have much to say about you and to judge. But he who sent me is true. And what I have heard from him, this I speak within the world.”
John 8:27	And they did not realize that he was calling God his Father.
John 8:28	And so Jesus said to them: “When you will have lifted up the Son of man, then you shall realize that I am, and that I do nothing of myself, but just as the Father has taught me, so do I speak.
John 8:29	And he who sent me is with me, and he has not abandoned me alone. For I always do what is pleasing to him.”
John 8:30	As he was speaking these things, many believed in him.
John 8:31	Therefore, Jesus said to those Jews who believed in him: “If you will abide in my word, you will truly be my disciples.
John 8:32	And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free.”
John 8:33	They answered him: “We are the offspring of Abraham, and we have never been a slave to anyone. How can you say, ‘You shall be set free?’ ”
John 8:34	Jesus answered them: “Amen, amen, I say to you, that everyone who commits sin is a slave of sin.
John 8:35	Now the slave does not abide in the house for eternity. Yet the Son does abide in eternity.
John 8:36	Therefore, if the Son has set you free, then you will truly be free.
John 8:37	I know that you are sons of Abraham. But you are seeking to kill me, because my word has not taken hold in you.
John 8:38	I speak what I have seen with my Father. And you do what you have seen with your father.”
John 8:39	They responded and said to him, “Abraham is our father.” Jesus said to them: “If you are the sons of Abraham, then do the works of Abraham.
John 8:40	But now you are seeking to kill me, a man who has spoken the truth to you, which I have heard from God. This is not what Abraham did.
John 8:41	You do the works of your father.” Therefore, they said to him: “We were not born out of fornication. We have one father: God.”
John 8:42	Then Jesus said to them: “If God were your father, certainly you would love me. For I proceeded and came from God. For I did not come from myself, but he sent me.
John 8:43	Why do you not recognize my speech? It is because you are not able to hear my word.
John 8:44	You are of your father, the devil. And you will carry out the desires of your father. He was a murderer from the beginning. And he did not stand in the truth, because the truth is not in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks it from his own self. For he is a liar, and the father of lies.
John 8:45	But if I speak the truth, you do not believe me.
John 8:46	Which of you can convict me of sin? If I speak the truth to you, why do you not believe me?
John 8:47	Whoever is of God, hears the words of God. For this reason, you do not hear them: because you are not of God.”
John 8:48	Therefore, the Jews responded and said to him, “Are we not correct in saying that you are a Samaritan, and that you have a demon?”
John 8:49	Jesus responded: “I do not have a demon. But I honor my Father, and you have dishonored me.
John 8:50	But I am not seeking my own glory. There is One who seeks and judges.
John 8:51	Amen, amen, I say to you, if anyone will have kept my word, he will not see death for eternity.”
John 8:52	Therefore, the Jews said: “Now we know that you have a demon. Abraham is dead, and the Prophets; and yet you say, ‘If anyone will have kept my word, he shall not taste death for eternity.’
John 8:53	Are you greater than our father Abraham, who is dead? And the prophets are dead. So who do you make yourself to be?”
John 8:54	Jesus responded: “If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me. And you say about him that he is your God.
John 8:55	And yet you have not known him. But I know him. And if I were to say that I do not know him, then I would be like you, a liar. But I know him, and I keep his word.
John 8:56	Abraham, your father, rejoiced that he might see my day; he saw it and was glad.”
John 8:57	And so the Jews said to him, “You have not yet reached fifty years, and you have seen Abraham?”
John 8:58	Jesus said to them, “Amen, amen, I say to you, before Abraham was made, I am.”
John 8:59	Therefore, they took up stones to cast at him. But Jesus hid himself, and he departed from the temple.
John 9:1	And Jesus, while passing by, saw a man blind from birth.
John 9:2	And his disciples asked him, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he would be born blind?”
John 9:3	Jesus responded: “Neither this man nor his parents sinned, but it was so that the works of God would be made manifest in him.
John 9:4	I must work the works of him who sent me, while it is day: the night is coming, when no one is able to work.
John 9:5	As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.”
John 9:6	When he had said these things, he spat on the ground, and he made clay from the spittle, and he smeared the clay over his eyes.
John 9:7	And he said to him: “Go, wash in the pool of Siloam” (which is translated as: one who has been sent). Therefore, he went away and washed, and he returned, seeing.
John 9:8	And so the bystanders and those who had seen him before, when he was a beggar, said, “Is this not the one who was sitting and begging?” Some said, “This is he.”
John 9:9	But others said, “Certainly not, but he is similar to him.” Yet truly, he himself said, “I am he.”
John 9:10	Therefore, they said to him, “How were your eyes opened?”
John 9:11	He responded: “That man who is called Jesus made clay, and he anointed my eyes and said to me, ‘Go to the pool of Siloam and wash.’ And I went, and I washed, and I see.”
John 9:12	And they said to him, “Where is he?” He said, “I do not know.”
John 9:13	They brought the one who had been blind to the Pharisees.
John 9:14	Now it was the Sabbath, when Jesus made the clay and opened his eyes.
John 9:15	Therefore, again the Pharisees questioned him as to how he had seen. And he said to them, “He placed clay over my eyes, and I washed, and I see.”
John 9:16	And so certain Pharisees said: “This man, who does not keep the Sabbath, is not from God.” But others said, “How could a sinful man accomplish these signs?” And there was a schism among them.
John 9:17	Therefore, they spoke again to the blind man, “What do you say about him who opened your eyes?” Then he said, “He is a Prophet.”
John 9:18	Therefore, the Jews did not believe, about him, that he had been blind and had seen, until they called the parents of him who had seen.
John 9:19	And they questioned them, saying: “Is this your son, whom you say was born blind? Then how is it that he now sees?”
John 9:20	His parents responded to them and said: “We know that this is our son and that he was born blind.
John 9:21	But how it is that he now sees, we do not know. And who opened his eyes, we do not know. Ask him. He is old enough. Let him speak for himself.”
John 9:22	His parents said these things because they were afraid of the Jews. For the Jews had already conspired, so that if anyone were to confess him to be the Christ, he would be expelled from the synagogue.
John 9:23	It was for this reason that his parents said: “He is old enough. Ask him.”
John 9:24	Therefore, they again called the man who had been blind, and they said to him: “Give glory to God. We know that this man is a sinner.”
John 9:25	And so he said to them: “If he is a sinner, I do not know it. One thing I do know, that although I was blind, now I see.”
John 9:26	Then they said to him: “What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?”
John 9:27	He answered them: “I have already told you, and you heard it. Why do you want to hear it again? Do you also want to become his disciples?”
John 9:28	Therefore, they cursed him and said: “You be his disciple. But we are disciples of Moses.
John 9:29	We know that God spoke to Moses. But this man, we do not know where he is from.”
John 9:30	The man responded and said to them: “Now in this is a wonder: that you do not know where he is from, and yet he has opened my eyes.
John 9:31	And we know that God does not hear sinners. But if anyone is a worshipper of God and does his will, then he heeds him.
John 9:32	From ancient times, it has not been heard that anyone has opened the eyes of someone born blind.
John 9:33	Unless this man were of God, he would not be able to do any such thing.”
John 9:34	They responded and said to him, “You were born entirely in sins, and you would teach us?” And they cast him out.
John 9:35	Jesus heard that they had cast him out. And when he had found him, he said to him, “Do you believe in the Son of God?”
John 9:36	He responded and said, “Who is he, Lord, so that I may believe in him?”
John 9:37	And Jesus said to him, “You have both seen him, and he is the one who is speaking with you.”
John 9:38	And he said, “I believe, Lord.” And falling prostrate, he worshipped him.
John 9:39	And Jesus said, “I came into this world in judgment, so that those who do not see, may see; and so that those who see, may become blind.”
John 9:40	And certain Pharisees, who were with him, heard this, and they said to him, “Are we also blind?”
John 9:41	Jesus said to them: “If you were blind, you would not have sin. Yet now you say, ‘We see.’ So your sin persists.”
John 10:1	“Amen, amen, I say to you, he who does not enter through the door into the fold of the sheep, but climbs up by another way, he is a thief and a robber.
John 10:2	But he who enters through the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
John 10:3	To him the doorkeeper opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name, and he leads them out.
John 10:4	And when he has sent out his sheep, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.
John 10:5	But they do not follow a stranger; instead they flee from him, because they do not know the voice of strangers.”
John 10:6	Jesus spoke this proverb to them. But they did not understand what he was saying to them.
John 10:7	Therefore, Jesus spoke to them again: “Amen, amen, I say to you, that I am the door of the sheep.
John 10:8	All others, as many as have come, are thieves and robbers, and the sheep did not listen to them.
John 10:9	I am the door. If anyone has entered through me, he will be saved. And he shall go in and go out, and he shall find pastures.
John 10:10	The thief does not come, except so that he may steal and slaughter and destroy. I have come so that they may have life, and have it more abundantly.
John 10:11	I am the good Shepherd. The good Shepherd gives his life for his sheep.
John 10:12	But the hired hand, and whoever is not a shepherd, to whom the sheep do not belong, he sees the wolf approaching, and he departs from the sheep and flees. And the wolf ravages and scatters the sheep.
John 10:13	And the hired hand flees, because he is a hired hand and there is no concern for the sheep within him.
John 10:14	I am the good Shepherd, and I know my own, and my own know me,
John 10:15	just as the Father knows me, and I know the Father. And I lay down my life for my sheep.
John 10:16	And I have other sheep that are not of this fold, and I must lead them. They shall hear my voice, and there shall be one sheepfold and one shepherd.
John 10:17	For this reason, the Father loves me: because I lay down my life, so that I may take it up again.
John 10:18	No one takes it away from me. Instead, I lay it down of my own accord. And I have the power to lay it down. And I have the power to take it up again. This is the commandment that I have received from my Father.”
John 10:19	A dissension occurred again among the Jews because of these words.
John 10:20	Then many of them were saying: “He has a demon or he is insane. Why do you listen him?”
John 10:21	Others were saying: “These are not the words of someone who has a demon. How would a demon be able to open the eyes of the blind?”
John 10:22	Now it was the Feast of the Dedication at Jerusalem, and it was winter.
John 10:23	And Jesus was walking in the temple, in the portico of Solomon.
John 10:24	And so the Jews surrounded him and said to him: “How long will you hold our souls in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.”
John 10:25	Jesus answered them: “I speak to you, and you do not believe. The works that I do in the name of my Father, these offer testimony about me.
John 10:26	But you do not believe, because you are not of my sheep.
John 10:27	My sheep hear my voice. And I know them, and they follow me.
John 10:28	And I give them eternal life, and they shall not perish, for eternity. And no one shall seize them from my hand.
John 10:29	What my Father gave to me is greater than all, and no one is able to seize from the hand of my Father.
John 10:30	I and the Father are one.”
John 10:31	Therefore, the Jews took up stones, in order to stone him.
John 10:32	Jesus answered them: “I have shown you many good works from my Father. For which of those works do you stone me?”
John 10:33	The Jews answered him: “We do not stone you for a good work, but for blasphemy and because, though you are a man, you make yourself God.”
John 10:34	Jesus responded to them: “Is it not written in your law, ‘I said: you are gods?’
John 10:35	If he called those to whom the word of God was given gods, and Scripture cannot be broken,
John 10:36	why do you say, about him whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the world, ‘You have blasphemed,’ because I said, ‘I am the Son of God?’
John 10:37	If I do not do the works of my Father, do not believe in me.
John 10:38	But if I do them, even if you are not willing to believe in me, believe the works, so that you may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I am in the Father.”
John 10:39	Therefore, they sought to apprehend him, but he escaped from their hands.
John 10:40	And he went again across the Jordan, to that place where John first was baptizing. And he lodged there.
John 10:41	And many went out to him. And they were saying: “Indeed, John accomplished no signs.
John 10:42	But all things whatsoever that John said about this man were true.” And many believed in him.
John 11:1	Now there was a certain sick man, Lazarus of Bethania, from the town of Mary and her sister Martha.
John 11:2	And Mary was the one who anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair; her brother Lazarus was sick.
John 11:3	Therefore, his sisters sent to him, saying: “Lord, behold, he whom you love is sick.”
John 11:4	Then, upon hearing this, Jesus said to them: “This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified by it.”
John 11:5	Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister Mary, and Lazarus.
John 11:6	Even so, after he heard that he was sick, he then still remained in the same place for two days.
John 11:7	Then, after these things, he said to his disciples, “Let us go into Judea again.”
John 11:8	The disciples said to him: “Rabbi, the Jews are even now seeking to stone you. And would you go there again?”
John 11:9	Jesus responded: “Are there not twelve hours in the day? If anyone walks in the daylight, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world.
John 11:10	But if he walks in the nighttime, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.”
John 11:11	He said these things, and after this, he said to them: “Lazarus our friend is sleeping. But I am going, so that I may awaken him from sleep.”
John 11:12	And so his disciples said, “Lord, if he is sleeping, he shall be healthy.”
John 11:13	But Jesus had spoken about his death. Yet they thought that he spoke about the repose of sleep.
John 11:14	Therefore, Jesus then said to them plainly, “Lazarus has died.
John 11:15	And I am glad for your sake that I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.”
John 11:16	And then Thomas, who is called the Twin, said to his fellow disciples, “Let us go, too, so that we may die with him.”
John 11:17	And so Jesus went. And he found that he had already been in the tomb for four days.
John 11:18	(Now Bethania was near Jerusalem, about fifteen stadia.)
John 11:19	And many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary, so as to console them over their brother.
John 11:20	Therefore, Martha, when she heard that Jesus was arriving, went out to meet him. But Mary was sitting at home.
John 11:21	And then Martha said to Jesus: “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
John 11:22	But even now, I know that whatever you will request from God, God will give to you.”
John 11:23	Jesus said to her, “Your brother shall rise again.”
John 11:24	Martha said to him, “I know that he shall rise again, at the resurrection on the last day.”
John 11:25	Jesus said to her: “I am the Resurrection and the Life. Whoever believes in me, even though he has died, he shall live.
John 11:26	And everyone who lives and believes in me shall not die for eternity. Do you believe this?”
John 11:27	She said to him: “Certainly, Lord. I have believed that you are the Christ, the Son of the living God, who has come into this world.”
John 11:28	And when she had said these things, she went and called her sister Mary quietly, saying, “The Teacher is here, and he is calling you.”
John 11:29	When she heard this, she rose up quickly and went to him.
John 11:30	For Jesus had not yet arrived in the town. But he was still at that place where Martha had met him.
John 11:31	Therefore, the Jews who were with her in the house and who were consoling her, when they had seen that Mary rose up quickly and went out, they followed her, saying, “She is going to the tomb, so that she may weep there.”
John 11:32	Therefore, when Mary had arrived to where Jesus was, seeing him, she fell down at his feet, and she said to him. “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.”
John 11:33	And then, when Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews who had arrived with her weeping, he groaned in spirit and became troubled.
John 11:34	And he said, “Where have you laid him?” They said to him, “Lord, come and see.”
John 11:35	And Jesus wept.
John 11:36	Therefore, the Jews said, “See how much he loved him!”
John 11:37	But some of them said, “Would not he who opened the eyes of one born blind have been able to cause this man not to die?”
John 11:38	Therefore, Jesus, again groaning from within himself, went to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone had been placed over it.
John 11:39	Jesus said, “Take away the stone.” Martha, the sister of him who had died, said to him, “Lord, by now it will smell, for this is the fourth day.”
John 11:40	Jesus said to her, “Did I not say to you that if you believe, you shall see the glory of God?”
John 11:41	Therefore, they took away the stone. Then, lifting up his eyes, Jesus said: “Father, I give thanks to you because you have heard me.
John 11:42	And I know that you always hear me, but I have said this for the sake of the people who are standing nearby, so that they may believe that you have sent me.”
John 11:43	When he had said these things, he cried in a loud voice, “Lazarus, come out.”
John 11:44	And immediately, he who had been dead went forth, bound at the feet and hands with winding bands. And his face was bound with a separate cloth. Jesus said to them, “Release him and let him go.”
John 11:45	Therefore, many of the Jews, who had come to Mary and Martha, and who had seen the things that Jesus did, believed in him.
John 11:46	But certain ones among them went to the Pharisees and told them the things that Jesus had done.
John 11:47	And so, the high priests and the Pharisees gathered a council, and they were saying: “What can we do? For this man accomplishes many signs.
John 11:48	If we leave him alone, in this way all will believe in him. And then the Romans will come and take away our place and our nation.”
John 11:49	Then one of them, named Caiaphas, since he was the high priest that year, said to them: “You do not understand anything.
John 11:50	Nor do you realize that it is expedient for you that one man should die for the people, and that the entire nation should not perish.”
John 11:51	Yet he did not say this from himself, but since he was the high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus would die for the nation.
John 11:52	And not only for the nation, but in order to gather together as one the children of God who have been dispersed.
John 11:53	Therefore, from that day, they planned to put him to death.
John 11:54	And so, Jesus no longer walked in public with the Jews. But he went into a region near the desert, to a city which is called Ephraim. And he lodged there with his disciples.
John 11:55	Now the Passover of the Jews was near. And many from the countryside ascended to Jerusalem before the Passover, so that they might sanctify themselves.
John 11:56	Therefore, they were seeking Jesus. And they conferred with one another, while standing in the temple: “What do you think? Will he come to the feast day?”
John 11:57	And the high priests and Pharisees had given an order, so that if anyone would know where he may be, he should reveal it, so that they might apprehend him.
John 12:1	Then six days before the Passover, Jesus went to Bethania, where Lazarus had died, whom Jesus raised up.
John 12:2	And they made a dinner for him there. And Martha was ministering. And truly, Lazarus was one of those who were sitting at table with him.
John 12:3	And then Mary took twelve ounces of pure spikenard ointment, very precious, and she anointed the feet of Jesus, and she wiped his feet with her hair. And the house was filled with the fragrance of the ointment.
John 12:4	Then one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, who was soon to betray him, said,
John 12:5	“Why was this ointment not sold for three hundred denarii and given to the needy?”
John 12:6	Now he said this, not out of concern for the needy, but because he was a thief and, since he held the purse, he used to carry what was put into it.
John 12:7	But Jesus said: “Permit her, so that she may keep it against the day of my burial.
John 12:8	For the poor, you have with you always. But me, you do always not have.”
John 12:9	Now a great multitude of the Jews knew that he was in that place, and so they came, not so much because of Jesus, but so that they might see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.
John 12:10	And the leaders of the priests planned to put Lazarus to death also.
John 12:11	For many of the Jews, because of him, were going away and were believing in Jesus.
John 12:12	Then, on the next day, the great crowd that had come to the feast day, when they had heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
John 12:13	took branches of palm trees, and they went ahead to meet him. And they were crying out: “Hosanna! Blessed is he who arrives in the name of the Lord, the king of Israel!”
John 12:14	And Jesus found a small donkey, and he sat upon it, just as it is written:
John 12:15	“Do not be afraid, daughter of Zion. Behold, your king arrives, sitting on the colt of a donkey.”
John 12:16	At first, his disciples did not realize these things. But when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written about him, and that these things happened to him.
John 12:17	And so the crowd that had been with him, when he called Lazarus from the tomb and raised him from the dead, offered testimony.
John 12:18	Because of this, too, the crowd went out to meet him. For they heard that he had accomplished this sign.
John 12:19	Therefore, the Pharisees said among themselves: “Do you see that we are accomplishing nothing? Behold, the entire world has gone after him.”
John 12:20	Now there were certain Gentiles among those who went up so that they might worship on the feast day.
John 12:21	Therefore, these approached Philip, who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and they petitioned him, saying: “Sir, we want to see Jesus.”
John 12:22	Philip went and told Andrew. Next, Andrew and Philip told Jesus.
John 12:23	But Jesus answered them by saying: “The hour arrives when the Son of man shall be glorified.
John 12:24	Amen, amen, I say to you, unless the grain of wheat falls to the ground and dies,
John 12:25	it remains alone. But if it dies, it yields much fruit. Whoever loves his life, will lose it. And whoever hates his life in this world, preserves it unto eternal life.
John 12:26	If anyone serves me, let him follow me. And where I am, there too my minister shall be. If anyone has served me, my Father will honor him.
John 12:27	Now my soul is troubled. And what should I say? Father, save me from this hour? But it is for this reason that I came to this hour.
John 12:28	Father, glorify your name!” And then a voice came from heaven, “I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again.”
John 12:29	Therefore, the crowd, which was standing near and had heard it, said that it was like thunder. Others were saying, “An Angel was speaking with him.”
John 12:30	Jesus responded and said: “This voice came, not for my sake, but for your sakes.
John 12:31	Now is the judgment of the world. Now will the prince of this world be cast out.
John 12:32	And when I have been lifted up from the earth, I will draw all things to myself.”
John 12:33	(Now he said this, signifying what kind of death he would die.)
John 12:34	The crowd answered him: “We have heard, from the law, that the Christ remains forever. And so how can you say, ‘The Son of man must be lifted up?’ Who is this Son of man?”
John 12:35	Therefore, Jesus said to them: “For a brief time, the Light is among you. Walk while you have the Light, so that the darkness may not overtake you. But whoever walks in darkness does not know where is he going.
John 12:36	While you have the Light, believe in the Light, so that you may be sons of the Light.” Jesus spoke these things, and then he went away and hid himself from them.
John 12:37	And although he had done such great signs in their presence, they did not believe in him,
John 12:38	so that the word of the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled, which says: “Lord, who has believed in our hearing? And to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?”
John 12:39	Because of this, they were not able to believe, for Isaiah said again:
John 12:40	“He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, so that they may not see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and be converted: and then I would heal them.”
John 12:41	These things Isaiah said, when he saw his glory and was speaking about him.
John 12:42	Yet truly, many of the leaders also believed in him. But because of the Pharisees, they did not confess him, so that they would not be cast out of the synagogue.
John 12:43	For they loved the glory of men more than the glory of God.
John 12:44	But Jesus cried out and said: “Whoever believes in me, does not believe in me, but in him who sent me.
John 12:45	And whoever sees me, sees him who sent me.
John 12:46	I have arrived as a light to the world, so that all who believe in me might not remain in darkness.
John 12:47	And if anyone has heard my words and not kept them, I do not judge him. For I did not come so that I may judge the world, but so that I may save the world.
John 12:48	Whoever despises me and does not accept my words has one who judges him. The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him on the last day.
John 12:49	For I am not speaking from myself, but from the Father who sent me. He gave a commandment to me as to what I should say and how I should speak.
John 12:50	And I know that his commandment is eternal life. Therefore, the things that I speak, just as the Father has said to me, so also do I speak.”
John 13:1	Before the feast day of the Passover, Jesus knew that the hour was approaching when he would pass from this world to the Father. And since he had always loved his own who were in the world, he loved them unto the end.
John 13:2	And when the meal had taken place, when the devil had now put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, to betray him,
John 13:3	knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands and that he came from God and was going to God,
John 13:4	he rose up from the meal, and he set aside his vestments, and when he had received a towel, he wrapped it around himself.
John 13:5	Next he put water into a shallow bowl, and he began to wash the feet of the disciples and to wipe them with the towel with which he was wrapped.
John 13:6	And then he came to Simon Peter. And Peter said to him, “Lord, would you wash my feet?”
John 13:7	Jesus responded and said to him: “What I am doing, you do not now understand. But you shall understand it afterward.”
John 13:8	Peter said to him, “You shall never wash my feet!” Jesus answered him, “If I do not wash you, you will have no place with me.”
John 13:9	Simon Peter said to him, “Then Lord, not only my feet, but also my hands and my head!”
John 13:10	Jesus said to him: “He who is washed need only wash his feet, and then he will be entirely clean. And you are clean, but not all.”
John 13:11	For he knew which one would betray him. For this reason, he said, “You are not all clean.”
John 13:12	And so, after he washed their feet and received his vestments, when he had sat down at table again, he said to them: “Do you know what I have done for you?
John 13:13	You call me Teacher and Lord, and you speak well: for so I am.
John 13:14	Therefore, if I, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash the feet of one another.
John 13:15	For I have given you an example, so that just as I have done for you, so also should you do.
John 13:16	Amen, amen, I say to you, the servant is not greater than his Lord, and the apostle is not greater than he who sent him.
John 13:17	If you understand this, you shall be blessed if you will do it.
John 13:18	I am not speaking about all of you. I know those whom I have chosen. But this is so that the Scripture may be fulfilled, ‘He who eats bread with me shall lift up his heel against me.’
John 13:19	And I tell you this now, before it happens, so that when it has happened, you may believe that I am.
John 13:20	Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever receives anyone whom I send, receives me. And whoever receives me, receives him who sent me.”
John 13:21	When Jesus had said these things, he was troubled in spirit. And he bore witness by saying: “Amen, amen, I say to you, that one among you shall betray me.”
John 13:22	Therefore, the disciples looked around at one another, uncertain about whom he spoke.
John 13:23	And leaning against the bosom of Jesus was one of his disciples, the one whom Jesus loved.
John 13:24	Therefore, Simon Peter motioned to this one and said to him, “Who is it that he is speaking about?”
John 13:25	And so, leaning against the chest of Jesus, he said to him, “Lord, who is it?”
John 13:26	Jesus responded, “It is he to whom I shall extend the dipped bread.” And when he had dipped the bread, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, son of Simon.
John 13:27	And after the morsel, Satan entered into him. And Jesus said to him, “What you are going to do, do quickly.”
John 13:28	Now none of those sitting at table knew why he had said this to him.
John 13:29	For some were thinking that, because Judas held the purse, that Jesus had told him, “Buy those things which are needed by us for the feast day,” or that he might give something to the needy.
John 13:30	Therefore, having accepted the morsel, he went out immediately. And it was night.
John 13:31	Then, when he had gone out, Jesus said: “Now the Son of man has been glorified, and God has been glorified in him.
John 13:32	If God has been glorified in him, then God will also glorify him in himself, and he will glorify him without delay.
John 13:33	Little sons, for a brief while, I am with you. You shall seek me, and just as I said to the Jews, ‘Where I am going, you are not able to go,’ so also I say to you now.
John 13:34	I give you a new commandment: Love one another. Just as I have loved you, so also must you love one another.
John 13:35	By this, all shall recognize that you are my disciples: if you will have love for one another.”
John 13:36	Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, where are you going?” Jesus responded: “Where I am going, you are not able to follow me now. But you shall follow afterward.”
John 13:37	Peter said to him: “Why am I unable to follow you now? I will lay down my life for you!”
John 13:38	Jesus answered him: “You will lay down your life for me? Amen, amen, I say to you, the rooster will not crow, until you deny me three times.”
John 14:1	“Do not let your heart be troubled. You believe in God. Believe in me also.
John 14:2	In my Father’s house, there are many dwelling places. If there were not, I would have told you. For I go to prepare a place for you.
John 14:3	And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will return again, and then I will take you to myself, so that where I am, you also may be.
John 14:4	And you know where I am going. And you know the way.”
John 14:5	Thomas said to him, “Lord, we do not know where you are going, so how can we know the way?”
John 14:6	Jesus said to him: “I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life. No one comes to the Father, except through me.
John 14:7	If you had known me, certainly you would also have known my Father. And from now on, you shall know him, and you have seen him.”
John 14:8	Philip said to him, “Lord, reveal the Father to us, and it is enough for us.”
John 14:9	Jesus said to him: “Have I been with you for so long, and you have not known me? Philip, whoever sees me, also sees the Father. How can you say, ‘Reveal the Father to us?’
John 14:10	Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I am speaking to you, I do not speak from myself. But the Father abiding in me, he does these works.
John 14:11	Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me?
John 14:12	Or else, believe because of these same works. Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever believes in me shall also do the works that I do. And greater things than these shall he do, for I go to the Father.
John 14:13	And whatever you shall ask the Father in my name, that I will do, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
John 14:14	If you shall ask anything of me in my name, that I will do.
John 14:15	If you love me, keep my commandments.
John 14:16	And I will ask the Father, and he will give another Advocate to you, so that he may abide with you for eternity:
John 14:17	the Spirit of Truth, whom the world is not able to accept, because it neither perceives him nor knows him. But you shall know him. For he will remain with you, and he will be in you.
John 14:18	I will not leave you orphans. I will return to you.
John 14:19	Yet a little while and the world will not see me any longer. But you will see me. For I live, and you shall live.
John 14:20	In that day, you shall know that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you.
John 14:21	Whoever holds to my commandments and keeps them: it is he who loves me. And whoever loves me shall be loved by my Father. And I will love him, and I will manifest myself to him.”
John 14:22	Judas, not the Iscariot, said to him: “Lord, how does it happen that you will manifest yourself to us and not to the world?”
John 14:23	Jesus responded and said to him: “If anyone loves me, he shall keep my word. And my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and we will make our dwelling place with him.
John 14:24	Whoever does not love me, does not keep not my words. And the word that you have heard is not of me, but it is of the Father who sent me.
John 14:25	These things I have spoken to you, while abiding with you.
John 14:26	But the Advocate, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you all things and will suggest to you everything whatsoever that I have said to you.
John 14:27	Peace I leave for you; my Peace I give to you. Not in the way that the world gives, do I give to you. Do not let your heart be troubled, and let it not fear.
John 14:28	You have heard that I said to you: I am going away, and I am returning to you. If you loved me, certainly you would be gladdened, because I am going to the Father. For the Father is greater than I.
John 14:29	And now I have told you this, before it happens, so that, when it will happen, you may believe.
John 14:30	I will not now speak at length with you. For the prince of this world is coming, but he does not have anything in me.
John 14:31	Yet this is so that the world may know that I love the Father, and that I am acting according to the commandment that the Father has given to me. Rise up, let us go from here.”
John 15:1	“I am the true vine, and my Father is the vinedresser.
John 15:2	Every branch in me that does not bear fruit, he will take away. And each one that does bear fruit, he will cleanse, so that it may bring forth more fruit.
John 15:3	You are clean now, because of the word that I have spoken to you.
John 15:4	Abide in me, and I in you. Just as the branch is not able to bear fruit of itself, unless it abides in the vine, so also are you unable, unless you abide in me.
John 15:5	I am the vine; you are the branches. Whoever abides in me, and I in him, bears much fruit. For without me, you are able to do nothing.
John 15:6	If anyone does not abide in me, he will be cast away, like a branch, and he will wither, and they will gather him and cast him into the fire, and he burns.
John 15:7	If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, then you may ask for whatever you will, and it shall be done for you.
John 15:8	In this, my Father is glorified: that you should bring forth very much fruit and become my disciples.
John 15:9	As the Father has loved me, so I have loved you. Abide in my love.
John 15:10	If you keep my precepts, you shall abide in my love, just as I also have kept my Father’s precepts and I abide in his love.
John 15:11	These things I have spoken to you, so that my joy may be in you, and your joy may be fulfilled.
John 15:12	This is my precept: that you love one another, just as I have loved you.
John 15:13	No one has a greater love than this: that he lay down his life for his friends.
John 15:14	You are my friends, if you do what I instruct you.
John 15:15	I will no longer call you servants, for the servant does not know what his Lord is doing. But I have called you friends, because everything whatsoever that I have heard from my Father, I have made known to you.
John 15:16	You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. And I have appointed you, so that you may go forth and bear fruit, and so that your fruit may last. Then whatever you have asked of the Father in my name, he shall give to you.
John 15:17	This I command you: that you love one another.
John 15:18	If the world hates you, know that it has hated me before you.
John 15:19	If you had been of the world, the world would love what is its own. Yet truly, you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world; because of this, the world hates you.
John 15:20	Remember my saying that I told you: The servant is not greater than his Lord. If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also. If they have kept my word, they will keep yours also.
John 15:21	But all these things they will do to you because of my name, for they do not know him who sent me.
John 15:22	If I had not come and had not spoken to them, they would not have sin. But now they have no excuse for their sin.
John 15:23	Whoever hates me, hates my Father also.
John 15:24	If I had not accomplished among them works that no other person has accomplished, they would not have sin. But now they have both seen me, and they have hated me and my Father.
John 15:25	But this is so that the word may be fulfilled which was written in their law: ‘For they hated me without cause.’
John 15:26	But when the Advocate has arrived, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who proceeds from the Father, he will offer testimony about me.
John 15:27	And you shall offer testimony, because you are with me from the beginning.”
John 16:1	“These things I have spoken to you, so that you would not stumble.
John 16:2	They will put you out of the synagogues. But the hour is coming when everyone who puts you to death will consider that he is offering an excellent service to God.
John 16:3	And they will do these things to you because they have not known the Father, nor me.
John 16:4	But these things I have spoken to you, so that, when the hour for these things will have arrived, you may remember that I told you.
John 16:5	But I did not tell you these things from the beginning, because I was with you. And now I am going to him who sent me. And no one among you has asked me, ‘Where are you going?’
John 16:6	But because I have spoken these things to you, sorrow has filled your heart.
John 16:7	But I tell you the truth: it is expedient for you that I am going. For if I do not go, the Advocate will not come to you. But when I will have gone away, I will send him to you.
John 16:8	And when he has arrived, he will argue against the world, about sin and about justice and about judgment:
John 16:9	about sin, indeed, because they have not believed in me;
John 16:10	about justice, truly, because I am going to the Father, and you will not see me any longer;
John 16:11	about judgment, then, because the prince of this world has already been judged.
John 16:12	I still have many things to say to you, but you are not able to bear them now.
John 16:13	But when the Spirit of truth has arrived, he will teach the whole truth to you. For he will not be speaking from himself. Instead, whatever he will hear, he will speak. And he will announce to you the things that are to come.
John 16:14	He shall glorify me. For he will receive from what is mine, and he will announce it to you.
John 16:15	All things whatsoever that the Father has are mine. For this reason, I said that he will receive from what is mine and that he will announce it to you.
John 16:16	A little while, and then you will not see me. And again a little while, and you will see me. For I am going to the Father.”
John 16:17	Then some of his disciples said to one another: “What is this, that he is saying to us: ‘A little while, and you will not see me,’ and ‘Again a little while, and you will see me,’ and, ‘For I am going to the Father?’ ”
John 16:18	And they said: “What is this, that he is saying, ‘A little while?’ We do not understand what he is saying.”
John 16:19	But Jesus realized that they wanted to question him, and so he said to them: “Are you inquiring among yourselves about this, that I said: ‘A little while, and you will not see me, and again a little while, and you will see me?’
John 16:20	Amen, amen, I say to you, that you shall mourn and weep, but the world will rejoice. And you shall be greatly saddened, yet your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
John 16:21	A woman, when she is giving birth, has sorrow, because her hour has arrived. But when she has given birth to the child, then she no longer remembers the difficulties, because of the joy: for a man has been born into the world.
John 16:22	Therefore, you also, indeed, have sorrow now. But I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice. And no one will take away your joy from you.
John 16:23	And, in that day, you will not petition me for anything. Amen, amen, I say to you, if you ask the Father for anything in my name, he will give it to you.
John 16:24	Until now, you have not requested anything in my name. Ask, and you shall receive, so that your joy may be full.
John 16:25	I have spoken these things to you in proverbs. The hour is coming when I will no longer speak to you in proverbs; instead, I will announce to you plainly from the Father.
John 16:26	In that day, you shall ask in my name, and I do not say to you that I will ask the Father for you.
John 16:27	For the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and because you have believed that I went forth from God.
John 16:28	I went forth from the Father, and I have come into the world. Next I am leaving the world, and I am going to the Father.”
John 16:29	His disciples said to him: “Behold, now you are speaking plainly and not reciting a proverb.
John 16:30	Now we know that you know all things, and that you have no need for anyone to question you. By this, we believe that you went forth from God.”
John 16:31	Jesus answered them: “Do you believe now?
John 16:32	Behold, the hour is coming, and it has now arrived, when you will be scattered, each one on his own, and you will leave me behind, alone. And yet I am not alone, for the Father is with me.
John 16:33	These things I have spoken to you, so that you may have peace in me. In the world, you will have difficulties. But have confidence: I have overcome the world.”
John 17:1	Jesus said these things, and then, lifting up his eyes toward heaven, he said: “Father, the hour has arrived: glorify your Son, so that your Son may glorify you,
John 17:2	just as you have given authority over all flesh to him, so that he may give eternal life to all those whom you have given to him.
John 17:3	And this is eternal life: that they may know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent.
John 17:4	I have glorified you on earth. I have completed the work that you gave me to accomplish.
John 17:5	And now Father, glorify me within yourself, with the glory that I had with you before the world ever was.
John 17:6	I have manifested your name to the men whom you have given to me from the world. They were yours, and you gave them to me. And they have kept your word.
John 17:7	Now they realize that all the things that you have given me are from you.
John 17:8	For I have given them the words that you gave to me. And they have accepted these words, and they have truly understood that I went forth from you, and they have believed that you sent me.
John 17:9	I pray for them. I do not pray for the world, but for those whom you have given to me. For they are yours.
John 17:10	And all that is mine is yours, and all that is yours is mine, and I am glorified in this.
John 17:11	And though I am not in the world, these are in the world, and I am coming to you. Father most holy, preserve them in your name, those whom you have given to me, so that they may be one, even as we are one.
John 17:12	While I was with them, I preserved them in your name. I have guarded those whom you have given to me, and not one of them is lost, except the son of perdition, so that the Scripture may be fulfilled.
John 17:13	And now I am coming to you. But I am speaking these things in the world, so that they may have the fullness of my joy within themselves.
John 17:14	I have given them your word, and the world has hated them. For they are not of the world, just as I, too, am not of the world.
John 17:15	I am not praying that you would take them out of the world, but that you would preserve them from evil.
John 17:16	They are not of the world, just as I also am not of the world.
John 17:17	Sanctify them in truth. Your word is truth.
John 17:18	Just as you have sent me into the world, I also have sent them into the world.
John 17:19	And it is for them that I sanctify myself, so that they, too, may be sanctified in truth.
John 17:20	But I am not praying for them only, but also for those who through their word shall believe in me.
John 17:21	So may they all be one. Just as you, Father, are in me, and I am in you, so also may they be one in us: so that the world may believe that you have sent me.
John 17:22	And the glory that you have given to me, I have given to them, so that they may be one, just as we also are one.
John 17:23	I am in them, and you are in me. So may they be perfected as one. And may the world know that you have sent me and that you have loved them, just as you have also loved me.
John 17:24	Father, I will that where I am, those whom you have given to me may also be with me, so that they may see my glory which you have given to me. For you loved me before the founding of the world.
John 17:25	Father most just, the world has not known you. But I have known you. And these have known that you sent me.
John 17:26	And I have made known your name to them, and I will make it known, so that the love in which you have loved me may be in them, and so that I may be in them.”
John 18:1	When Jesus had said these things, he departed with his disciples across the Torrent of Kidron, where there was a garden, into which he entered with his disciples.
John 18:2	But Judas, who betrayed him, also knew the place, for Jesus had frequently met with his disciples there.
John 18:3	Then Judas, when he had received a cohort from both the high priests and the attendants of the Pharisees, approached the place with lanterns and torches and weapons.
John 18:4	And so Jesus, knowing all that was about to happen to him, advanced and said to them, “Who are you seeking?”
John 18:5	They answered him, “Jesus the Nazarene.” Jesus said to them, “I am he.” Now Judas, who betrayed him, was also standing with them.
John 18:6	Then, when he said to them, “I am he,” they moved back and fell to the ground.
John 18:7	Then again he questioned them: “Who are you seeking?” And they said, “Jesus the Nazarene.”
John 18:8	Jesus responded: “I told you that I am he. Therefore, if you are seeking me, permit these others to go away.”
John 18:9	This was so that the word might be fulfilled, which he said, “Of those whom you have given to me, I have not lost any of them.”
John 18:10	Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it, and he struck the servant of the high priest, and he cut off his right ear. Now the name of the servant was Malchus.
John 18:11	Therefore, Jesus said to Peter: “Set your sword into the scabbard. Should I not drink the chalice which my Father has given to me?”
John 18:12	Then the cohort, and the tribune, and the attendants of the Jews apprehended Jesus and bound him.
John 18:13	And they led him away, first to Annas, for he was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was the high priest that year.
John 18:14	Now Caiaphas was the one who had given counsel to the Jews that it was expedient for one man to die for the people.
John 18:15	And Simon Peter was following Jesus with another disciple. And that disciple was known to the high priest, and so he entered with Jesus into the court of the high priest.
John 18:16	But Peter was standing outside at the entrance. Therefore, the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the woman who was the doorkeeper, and he led in Peter.
John 18:17	Therefore, the woman servant keeping the door said to Peter, “Are you not also among the disciples of this man?” He said, “I am not.”
John 18:18	Now the servants and attendants were standing before burning coals, for it was cold, and they were warming themselves. And Peter was standing with them also, warming himself.
John 18:19	Then the high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his doctrine.
John 18:20	Jesus responded to him: “I have spoken openly to the world. I have always taught in the synagogue and in the temple, where all the Jews meet. And I have said nothing in secret.
John 18:21	Why do you question me? Question those who heard what I said to them. Behold, they know these things that I have said.”
John 18:22	Then, when he had said this, one the attendants standing nearby struck Jesus, saying: “Is this the way you answer the high priest?”
John 18:23	Jesus answered him: “If I have spoken wrongly, offer testimony about the wrong. But if I have spoken correctly, then why do you strike me?”
John 18:24	And Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas, the high priest.
John 18:25	Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. Then they said to him, “Are you not also one of his disciples?” He denied it and said, “I am not.”
John 18:26	One of the servants of the high priest (a relative of him whose ear Peter had cut off) said to him, “Did I not see you in the garden with him?”
John 18:27	Therefore, again, Peter denied it. And immediately the rooster crowed.
John 18:28	Then they led Jesus from Caiaphas into the praetorium. Now it was morning, and so they did not enter into the praetorium, so that they would not be defiled, but might eat the Passover.
John 18:29	Therefore, Pilate went outside to them, and he said, “What accusation are you bringing against this man?”
John 18:30	They responded and said to him, “If he were not an evil-doer, we would not have handed him over you.”
John 18:31	Therefore, Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and judge him according to your own law.” Then the Jews said to him, “It is not lawful for us to execute anyone.”
John 18:32	This was so that the word of Jesus would be fulfilled, which he spoke signifying what kind of death he would die.
John 18:33	Then Pilate entered the praetorium again, and he called Jesus and said to him, “You are the king of the Jews?”
John 18:34	Jesus responded, “Are you saying this of yourself, or have others spoken to you about me?”
John 18:35	Pilate responded: “Am I a Jew? Your own nation and the high priests have handed you over to me. What have you done?”
John 18:36	Jesus responded: “My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my ministers would certainly strive so that I would not be handed over to the Jews. But my kingdom is not now from here.”
John 18:37	And so Pilate said to him, “You are a king, then?” Jesus answered, “You are saying that I am a king. For this I was born, and for this I came into the world: so that I may offer testimony to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth hears my voice.”
John 18:38	Pilate said to him, “What is truth?” And when he had said this, he went out again to the Jews, and he said to them, “I find no case against him.
John 18:39	But you have a custom, that I should release someone to you at the Passover. Therefore, do you want me to release to you the king of the Jews?”
John 18:40	Then they all cried out repeatedly, saying: “Not this one, but Barabbas.” Now Barabbas was a robber.
John 19:1	Therefore, Pilate then took Jesus into custody and scourged him.
John 19:2	And the soldiers, plaiting a crown of thorns, imposed it on his head. And they put a purple garment around him.
John 19:3	And they were approaching him and saying, “Hail, king of the Jews!” And they struck him repeatedly.
John 19:4	Then Pilate went outside again, and he said to them: “Behold, I am bringing him out to you, so that you may realize that I find no case against him.”
John 19:5	(Then Jesus went out, bearing the crown of thorns and the purple garment.) And he said to them, “Behold the man.”
John 19:6	Therefore, when the high priests and the attendants had seen him, they cried out, saying: “Crucify him! Crucify him!” Pilate said to them: “Take him yourselves and crucify him. For I find no case against him.”
John 19:7	The Jews answered him, “We have a law, and according to the law, he ought to die, for he has made himself the Son of God.”
John 19:8	Therefore, when Pilate had heard this word, he was more fearful.
John 19:9	And he entered into the praetorium again. And he said to Jesus. “Where are you from?” But Jesus gave him no response.
John 19:10	Therefore, Pilate said to him: “Will you not speak to me? Do you not know that I have authority to crucify you, and I have authority to release you?”
John 19:11	Jesus responded, “You would not have any authority over me, unless it were given to you from above. For this reason, he who has handed me over to you has the greater sin.”
John 19:12	And from then on, Pilate was seeking to release him. But the Jews were crying out, saying: “If you release this man, you are no friend of Caesar. For anyone who makes himself a king contradicts Caesar.”
John 19:13	Now when Pilate had heard these words, he brought Jesus outside, and he sat down in the seat of judgment, in a place which is called the Pavement, but in Hebrew, it is called the Elevation.
John 19:14	Now it was the preparation day of the Passover, about the sixth hour. And he said to the Jews, “Behold your king.”
John 19:15	But they were crying out: “Take him away! Take him away! Crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Shall I crucify your king?” The high priests responded, “We have no king except Caesar.”
John 19:16	Therefore, he then handed him over to them to be crucified. And they took Jesus and led him away.
John 19:17	And carrying his own cross, he went forth to the place which is called Calvary, but in Hebrew it is called the Place of the Skull.
John 19:18	There they crucified him, and with him two others, one on each side, with Jesus in the middle.
John 19:19	Then Pilate also wrote a title, and he set it above the cross. And it was written: JESUS THE NAZARENE, KING OF THE JEWS.
John 19:20	Therefore, many of the Jews read this title, for the place where Jesus was crucified was close to the city. And it was written in Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin.
John 19:21	Then the high priests of the Jews said to Pilate: Do not write, ‘King of the Jews,’ but that he said, ‘I am King of the Jews.’
John 19:22	Pilate responded, “What I have written, I have written.”
John 19:23	Then the soldiers, when they had crucified him, took his garments, and they made four parts, one part to each soldier, and the tunic. But the tunic was seamless, woven from above throughout the whole.
John 19:24	Then they said to one another, “Let us not cut it, but instead let us cast lots over it, to see whose it will be.” This was so that the Scripture would be fulfilled, saying: “They have distributed my garments among themselves, and for my vesture they have cast lots.” And indeed, the soldiers did these things.
John 19:25	And standing beside the cross of Jesus were his mother, and his mother’s sister, and Mary of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.
John 19:26	Therefore, when Jesus had seen his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing near, he said to his mother, “Woman, behold your son.”
John 19:27	Next, he said to the disciple, “Behold your mother.” And from that hour, the disciple accepted her as his own.
John 19:28	After this, Jesus knew that all had been accomplished, so in order that the Scripture might be completed, he said, “I thirst.”
John 19:29	And there was a container placed there, full of vinegar. Then, placing a sponge full of vinegar around hyssop, they brought it to his mouth.
John 19:30	Then Jesus, when he had received the vinegar, said: “It is consummated.” And bowing down his head, he surrendered his spirit.
John 19:31	Then the Jews, because it was the preparation day, so that the bodies would not remain upon the cross on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a great day), they petitioned Pilate in order that their legs might be broken, and they might be taken away.
John 19:32	Therefore, the soldiers approached, and, indeed, they broke the legs of the first one, and of the other who was crucified with him.
John 19:33	But after they had approached Jesus, when they saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs.
John 19:34	Instead, one of the soldiers opened his side with a lance, and immediately there went out blood and water.
John 19:35	And he who saw this has offered testimony, and his testimony is true. And he knows that he speaks the truth, so that you also may believe.
John 19:36	For these things happened so that the Scripture would be fulfilled: “You shall not break a bone of him.”
John 19:37	And again, another Scripture says: “They shall look upon him, whom they have pierced.”
John 19:38	Then, after these things, Joseph from Arimathea, (because he was a disciple of Jesus, but a secret one for fear of the Jews) petitioned Pilate so that he might take away the body of Jesus. And Pilate gave permission. Therefore, he went and took away the body of Jesus.
John 19:39	Now Nicodemus also arrived, (who had gone to Jesus at first by night) bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloe, weighing about seventy pounds.
John 19:40	Therefore, they took the body of Jesus, and they bound it with linen cloths and the aromatic spices, just as it is the manner of the Jews to bury.
John 19:41	Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden there was a new tomb, in which no one had yet been laid.
John 19:42	Therefore, because of the preparation day of the Jews, since the tomb was nearby, they placed Jesus there.
John 20:1	Then on the first Sabbath, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb early, while it was still dark, and she saw that the stone had been rolled away from the tomb.
John 20:2	Therefore, she ran and went to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and she said to them, “They have taken the Lord away from the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him.”
John 20:3	Therefore, Peter departed with the other disciple, and they went to the tomb.
John 20:4	Now they both ran together, but the other disciple ran more quickly, ahead of Peter, and so he arrived at the tomb first.
John 20:5	And when he bowed down, he saw the linen cloths lying there, but he did not yet enter.
John 20:6	Then Simon Peter arrived, following him, and he entered the tomb, and he saw the linen cloths lying there,
John 20:7	and the separate cloth which had been over his head, not placed with the linen cloths, but in a separate place, wrapped up by itself.
John 20:8	Then the other disciple, who had arrived first at the tomb, also entered. And he saw and believed.
John 20:9	For as yet they did not understand the Scripture, that it was necessary for him to rise again from the dead.
John 20:10	Then the disciples went away again, each by himself.
John 20:11	But Mary was standing outside the tomb, weeping. Then, while she was weeping, she bowed down and gazed into the tomb.
John 20:12	And she saw two Angels in white, sitting where the body of Jesus had been placed, one at the head, and one at the feet.
John 20:13	They say to her, “Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to them, “Because they have taken away my Lord, and I do not know where they have placed him.”
John 20:14	When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not know that it was Jesus.
John 20:15	Jesus said to her: “Woman, why are you weeping? Who are you seeking?” Considering that it was the gardener, she said to him, “Sir, if you have moved him, tell me where you have placed him, and I will take him away.”
John 20:16	Jesus said to her, “Mary!” And turning, she said to him, “Rabboni!” (which means, Teacher).
John 20:17	Jesus said to her: “Do not touch me. For I have not yet ascended to my Father. But go to my brothers and tell them: ‘I am ascending to my Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God.’ ”
John 20:18	Mary Magdalene went, announcing to the disciples, “I have seen the Lord, and these are the things that he said to me.”
John 20:19	Then, when it was late on the same day, on the first of the Sabbaths, and the doors were closed where the disciples were gathered, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst, and he said to them: “Peace to you.”
John 20:20	And when he had said this, he showed them his hands and side. And the disciples were gladdened when they saw the Lord.
John 20:21	Therefore, he said to them again: “Peace to you. As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
John 20:22	When he had said this, he breathed on them. And he said to them: “Receive the Holy Spirit.
John 20:23	Those whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them, and those whose sins you shall retain, they are retained.”
John 20:24	Now Thomas, one of the twelve, who is called the Twin, was not with them when Jesus arrived.
John 20:25	Therefore, the other disciples said to him, “We have seen the Lord.” But he said to them, “Unless I will see in his hands the mark of the nails and place my finger into the place of the nails, and place my hand into his side, I will not believe.”
John 20:26	And after eight days, again his disciples were within, and Thomas was with them. Jesus arrived, though the doors had been closed, and he stood in their midst and said, “Peace to you.”
John 20:27	Next, he said to Thomas: “Look at my hands, and place your finger here; and bring your hand close, and place it at my side. And do not choose to be unbelieving, but faithful.”
John 20:28	Thomas responded and said to him, “My Lord and my God.”
John 20:29	Jesus said to him: “You have seen me, Thomas, so you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed.”
John 20:30	Jesus also accomplished many other signs in the sight of his disciples. These have not been written in this book.
John 20:31	But these things have been written, so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and so that, in believing, you may have life in his name.
John 21:1	After this, Jesus manifested himself again to the disciples at the Sea of Tiberias. And he manifested himself in this way.
John 21:2	These were together: Simon Peter and Thomas, who is called the Twin, and Nathanael, who was from Cana of Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples.
John 21:3	Simon Peter said to them, “I am going fishing.” They said to him, “And we are going with you.” And they went and climbed into the ship. And in that night, they caught nothing.
John 21:4	But when morning arrived, Jesus stood on the shore. Yet the disciples did not realize that it was Jesus.
John 21:5	Then Jesus said to them, “Children, do you have any food?” They answered him, “No.”
John 21:6	He said to them, “Cast the net to the right side of the ship, and you will find some.” Therefore, they cast it out, and then they were not able to draw it in, because of the multitude of fish.
John 21:7	Therefore, the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, “It is the Lord.” Simon Peter, when he had heard that it was the Lord, wrapped his tunic around himself, (for he was naked) and he cast himself into the sea.
John 21:8	Then the other disciples arrived in a boat, (for they were not far from the land, only about two hundred cubits) dragging the net with the fish.
John 21:9	Then, when they climbed down to the land they saw burning coals prepared, and fish already placed above them, and bread.
John 21:10	Jesus said to them, “Bring some of the fish that you have just now caught.”
John 21:11	Simon Peter climbed up and drew in the net to land: full of large fish, one hundred and fifty-three of them. And although there were so many, the net was not torn.
John 21:12	Jesus said to them, “Approach and dine.” And not one of them sitting down to eat dared to ask him, “Who are you?” For they knew that it was the Lord.
John 21:13	And Jesus approached, and he took bread, and he gave it to them, and similarly with the fish.
John 21:14	This was now the third time that Jesus was manifested to his disciples, after he had resurrected from the dead.
John 21:15	Then, when they had dined, Jesus said to Simon Peter, “Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these?” He said to him, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.” He said to him, “Feed my lambs.”
John 21:16	He said to him again: “Simon, son of John, do you love me?” He said to him, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.” He said to him, “Feed my lambs.”
John 21:17	He said to him a third time, “Simon, son of John, do you love me?” Peter was very grieved that he had asked him a third time, “Do you love me?” And so he said to him: “Lord, you know all things. You know that I love you.” He said to him, “Feed my sheep.
John 21:18	Amen, amen, I say to you, when you were younger, you girded yourself and walked wherever you wanted. But when you are older, you will extend your hands, and another shall gird you and lead you where you do not want to go.”
John 21:19	Now he said this to signify by what kind of death he would glorify God. And when he had said this, he said to him, “Follow me.”
John 21:20	Peter, turning around, saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following, the one who also had leaned on his chest at supper and said, “Lord, who is it who shall betray you?”
John 21:21	Therefore, when Peter had seen him, he said to Jesus, “Lord, but what about this one?”
John 21:22	Jesus said to him: “If I want him to remain until I return, what is that to you? You follow me.”
John 21:23	Therefore, the saying went out among the brothers that this disciple would not die. But Jesus did not say to him that he would not die, but only, “If I want him to remain until I return, what is that to you?”
John 21:24	This is the same disciple who offers testimony about these things, and who has written these things. And we know that his testimony is true.
John 21:25	Now there are also many other things that Jesus did, which, if each of these were written down, the world itself, I suppose, would not be able to contain the books that would be written.